\\\\\
Burdens and Benefits: Dual Aspects of Genetic Knowledge

Janet K. Williams

The opportunity to learn about one's genetic make-up has increased with new 
knowledge generated by the Human Genome Project. This ongoing qualitative 
study describes the burdens and benefits of learning carrier status for adults 
with a positive family history of cystic fibrosls, Tay-Sachs disease, Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy, or fragile-X syndrome. Semi-structured interviews were 
conducted in person or by telephone with 23 people from 16 families, prior to 
receiving results and one month after receiving results of screening. Content 
was analyzed to identify major themes. Prior to receiving results, themes 
shared by participants included: anticipating emotions, remembering family 
hardships associated with the condition, reproductive planning or undergoing 
testing on behalf of the children, and curiosity. After results were received 
benefits included: family planning, information for the children, emotional 
relief and satisfaction of curiosity. Burdens included emotional distress, 
family strain, and insurance worries. Study results suggest a need for 
recognition of the personal impact of genetic carrier knowledge and the need 
to identify effective mechanisms for assisting people to make decisions 
regarding disclosure of genetic information to family members and others.


\\\\\
Family Functioning, Hardiness, and Quality of Life in Families with 
Developmentally Disables Adults

Sandra A. Faux and M. Ford-Gilboe

Little attention has been paid to families with developmentally disabled adult 
members. Within a ecological model of chronic family stress and adaptation 
(Kazak), 30 family members (parents or adult siblings) of developmentally 
disabled adults (age 21-48 years) completed the Feetham Family Functioning 
Survey (Feetham); the Family APGAR (Smilkstein); and the Family Hardiness 
Index (McCubbin, McCubbin, & Patterson). In addition, semistructured 
qualitative interviews were conducted; data were analyzed inductively using 
grounded theory strategies. The range of total scale scores fell within 
previously reported scores for families with chronically ill members. Total 
scale scores on the FFS, APGAR, and FHI were moderately correlated (r=.54-.64, 
p=.01), indicated that these instruments measured similar, although not 
identical, concepts. Convergence of the qualitative and quantitative family 
were analyzed to develop a beginning estimate of family quality of life as 
recommended by Knafl et al. The utility of the instruments for this unique 
family population will be discussed.


\\\\\
Family Illness Deeds Following the Diagnosis of Chronic Illness

Kathryn H. Anderson

This study examined the nature of illness demands on 78 families subsequent to 
diagnosis of a chronic illness. Data were collected by mailed survey two 
months after the diagnosis in the outpatient setting. The attribution score of 
the demands of the illness (DOII) questionnaire (Woods, Haberman, & Packard, 
1987) was used to measure illness demands. Illness demands, from the chronic 
illnesses diagnosed in study patients, were examined for the sample families 
as a whole. Similarities and differences in patient and family member 
responses with illness demands were also explored. Family illness demands in 
this sample were found using t-tests to be significantly less than the demands 
in the normative sample, and were found to be significantly negatively 
correlated to family quality of life and positively correlated with illness 
severity. Sample characteristics of early chronic illness demands were 
identified. Implications for research and practice will be discussed. Study 
results support inclusion of family illness demands as an important factor in 
family illness stress.


\\\\\
Alcohol Dependence, Smoking Status, Reproductive Characteristics and Bone 
Density in Premenopausal Women

Kathleen Clark and MaryFran Sowers

Stochastic models developed by Horseman & Burkinshaw demonstrated that 2/3 of 
the risk for fracture in postmenopausal years was determined by the level of 
premenopausal bone density. Alcohol misuse in the premenopausal years, because 
of its adverse affects on osteoblast development and on the reproductive 
system, may retard the attainment of peak bone density. Cigarette smoking, 
common among women who misuse alcohol, may also contribute to lower bone 
density. This study evaluated bone density of the lumbar spine and femoral 
neck, smoking status and selected reproductive characteristics in 50 
premenopausal women, 25 who were alcohol dependent and 25 control subjects, 
matched for age, height and weight. Mean bone density was 6.8% lower at the 
femoral neck and 6.9% lower at the lumbar spine in women who were alcohol 
dependent (p<0.05). Some of that difference may be attributed to cigarette 
smoking. When smoking was controlled through comparison of pairs'concordant on 
smoking status, there was no significant difference in bone mineral density at 
either site. Women who were alcohol dependent were more likely to report 
episodes of non-pregnancy related amenorrhea and to have experienced their 
first pregnancy at age 16 years or younger. These finding suggest that women 
who are alcohol dependent have lower bone density than those who are not. 
Smoking behavior and reproductive characteristics may be considered part of 
the explanation for the difference.


\\\\\
Appraisal, Coping and Adaptation in Women with Breast Cancer: A Multi-National 
Study

Shirley Moore, Renzo Zanotti, Geraldine McCarthy, Doris Modly, and Sandra 
Broughton

Although illness belief systems of cultures have been documented, few studies 
have addressed the influence of culture on a woman's appraisal, coping and 
adaptation processes to breast cancer. The purpose of this study, therefore, 
was to compare the coping and adaptation responses of women with breast cancer 
across several countries. A cross-sectional convenience sample of 60 women in 
each of the countries of Canada, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, and the USA newly 
diagnosed (< 120 days) with breast cancer were surveyed. Subjects' appraisal, 
coping, and adaptation were assessed using the following instruments: (1) 
Primary Appraisal Questionnaire, (2) Ways of Coping Scale (Folkman, Lazarus, 
Dunkel-Schetter, Delongis, & Gruen, 1986; Lazarus & Folkman, 1988) , and (3) 
Psychological Adjustment to Illness Scale (PAIS) (Derogates, 1986). All data 
have been collected and data analysis is in progress. Differences across 
countries in appraisal and coping strategies each will be assessed using 
Chi-square analysis. Differences in adaptation across countries will be 
examined using ANOVA. This study will elucidate the culture-relevant 
dimensions of coping with breast cancer and emphasizes a multicultural and 
international approach to a global health concern.


\\\\\
A Comparison of Grief Responses Among Professional Women

M.E. Allen and B. Fischer

The purpose of this study was to examine the differences in the female grief 
experience between nurses and certified public accountants within two years 
after the death of a parent or grandparent. Using the Grief Experience 
Inventory developed by Sanders, Mauger and Strong (1985), data were collected 
from a convenience sample of nurses and accountants (n=50). Data for the 
groups on the nine subscales of despair, anger/hostility, guilt, social 
isolation, loss of control, rumination, depersonalization, somatization and 
death anxiety were analyzed using the Spearman Rho, Mann-Whitney in Test and 
MANOVA. These data with content analyses related to feelings since the death 
and now, influence of identified profession on the grief response and 
subseguent family expectations during the bereavement, will be presented.


\\\\\
Factors Related to Women's Participation in Programs for the Early Detection 
of Breast and Gynecological Cancers

Julia F. Houfek, Cecilia R. Barron, Nancy L. Waltman, and Gloria Gross

The purpose of this in-progress study is to describe relationships among 
selected psychosocial variables (i.e., anxiety, body awareness, and social 
support), perceptions of prior early detection experiences, background 
characteristics, and women's participation in programs for the early detection 
of breast and gynecological cancers. The Cox Interaction Model of Client 
Health Behaviors (Cox, 1982) serves as the conceptual framework. A convenience 
sample of 200 women will be recruited from the community. Subjects will be 
interviewed using the following: Spielberger's Inventory (trait anxiety), Body 
Awareness Questionnaire (attentiveness to normal body processes), Early 
Detection Experiences Questionnaire (perceptions of early detection/screening 
experiences); Marlowe-Crowne Scale (social desirability); and a questionnaire 
to determine types and frequency of routine screening practices, family 
history of breast and gynecological cancers, and social support related to 
early detection/screening practices. The interview takes about 1 hour. 
Participants will be contacted by telephone at 6- and 12-months post-interview 
to determine participation in early screening/detection behaviors since the 
interview. Data will be analyzed by multiple regressions and content analysis. 
Results provide direction for development and testing of strategies designed 
for increasing women's participation in early detection programs.


\\\\\
Injury Patterns and Severity Scores of Battered Women in the Emergency 
Department

Ruth A. Pakieser, R. Muelleman, and P. Lenaghan

Nine thousand fifty-seven consecutive women between 19 - 65 years were 
enrolled at ten emergency departments (ED) in two cities. All had their ED 
chart reviewed and were offered a prospective, confidential survey if not 
excluded by illness severity or language barrier. Identification of battered 
women was made by survey response or chart review; injury distribution and 
severity were coded by the abbreviated injury scale. All causes of injury were 
E-coded. Proportions of injuries in each body region and specific injuries 
were compared by comparison of proportions. Approximately 50% completed 
surveys. Of women enrolled, 280 were injured and battered. Most common 
mechanisms of injury of the non-battered women were falls (22.7%), MVA 
(18.5%), movement related (14.79%) and accidental cutting (14.6%). Battered 
women had more injuries and higher 155 scores. Battered women were more likely 
to be injured in the head (p<.001), face (p<.001), neck (p=.009), thorax 
(p<.001) and abdomen (p<.001); but less likely to be injured in the spine 
(p=.006) and lower extremity (p=.005). Injuries more common in the battered 
group were head, face, neck, thorax, abdomen and upper extremity contusions 
(all p<.001) as well as orbit fracture (p=.002); but less common were cervical 
(p=.04) and lumbar (p=.057), strains, ankle sprains (p=.026) and upper 
extremity cutting (p=.04). Ten percent of the women who responded to the 
survey acknowledged being in an abusive relationship. These women presented 
with complaints of vaginitis, pharyngitis, urinary tract infection, and 
attempted suicide more frequently than did injured women who denied a current 
abusive relationship.

\\\\\
Mammography Utilization Among African-American Women

Mary de Meneses

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy diagnosed in women. Implementation 
of nationwide mammography screening over the past two decades has coincided 
with an increased percentage of lower stage breast cancers diagnosed in this 
country. Screening mammography is currently the best method to detect early 
stage breast cancer. Mammography utilization varies significantly between 
racial and socioeconomic groups, with a lower rate for African-American women 
than Caucasians. A survey was used to define demographics, socioeconomic 
status, baseline mammography utilization, transportation, level of breast 
cancer knowledge, and presence of regular health care in older women from an 
African-American community. This correlational study identified why screening 
mammography services were not utilized by low-income African-American women. 
Analyses were descriptive for demographics and correlative for variables 
hypothesized as possible barriers. Findings indicate that most subjects 
believed prevention of cancer was an important reason for having a mammogram. 
Over three-fourths of the subjects had never had a mammogram. Reasons for not 
having a mammogram included: lack of finances, lack of transportation, and 
fear of pain.


\\\\\
Psychosocial Needs of Women with Breast Cancer: A Comparison Across Disease 
Stages

M. H. Frost, A. M. Dose, L. Hartmann, R. Johnson, P. Novotny, J. O'Fallan, T. 
Rummans, M. Taylor

With an estimated 182,000 women in the United States receiving a new diagnosis 
of breast cancer in 1995, follow-up care is of prime interest to health care 
professionals. While several researchers have reported the psychosocial impact 
of a cancer diagnosis, few have examined changing needs of women as the stage 
of the disease progresses. Explored in this descriptive study were the needs 
of women with a diagnosis of breast cancer in the following stages of their 
disease: newly diagnosed (n=55), receiving adjuvant therapy (n=53), stable 
disease (n= 85), or diagnosed with a recurrence (n=66). The Cancer 
Rehabilitation Evaluation System - Short Form (CARES-SF), Health Status 
Questionnaire (HSQ), Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), along with a researcher 
developed questionnaire were completed by participants. Differences in needs 
were found in women in different stages of their disease process. Women 
diagnosed with recurrence experienced more difficulties than women in the 
other stages of the disease process. This research points to the significance 
of interventions aimed at addressing the adjustment needs of women with a 
diagnosis of recurrent breast cancer.


\\\\\
Quality of Life of Women with Heart Failure

Susan J. Bennett and S. L. Baker

Little is known about quality of life (QOL) as experienced by women with heart 
failure (HF). The purpose of the exploratory study was to examine the role of 
illness symptoms, perceived health status, and social support on QOL among 
women with HF. The convenience sample consisted of 30 women hospitalized at a 
tertiary care medical center. The women completed five self-report 
instruments. Internal consistency reliabilities of the instruments ranged from 
.87 to .97. Symptoms of HF were significantly and negatively correlated with 
overall QOL (r=-.57, p <.01), while physical health status was positively 
associated with QOL (r=.62, p<.001). Multiple regression analysis demonstrated 
that only physical health status was a significant predictor of QOL. The 
results indicate that physical symptoms and physical health status were 
problems for these chronically ill women and that QOL was influenced by 
physical factors associated with their disease. A subsequent finding of the 
study suggests that the women represented a frail, vulnerable population who 
required special considerations during data collection.


\\\\\
Resources as Predictors of Health Outcomes in Midlife Women

Greer Glazer

Midlife has been overlooked in the study of the human lifecycle because of the 
dominant view that "nothing of interest takes place during this period of 
development" (Nolan, 1986, p. 51). However, a better understanding of the 
midlife period for women is particularly important because midlife women seem 
to be at high risk for life events which may negatively affect health. These 
life events put midlife women at risk for stress, depression and negative 
outcomes. The purpose of this research, which is part of a larger study, was 
to use Hobfoll's Conservation of Resources theory as a framework for studying 
predictors of anxiety, depression and health promoting activities. Hobfoll's 
theory predicts that stress occurs when people are threatened with the 
possibility of resource loss, when resource loss occurs, or when people fail 
to gain adequate resources following investment of resources. One hundred and 
twenty-nine midlife women were selected from a community based healthy group 
of midlife women via flyers, word of mouth, church groups, social 
organizations, high school parent-teacher associations, educational 
institutions, solicitation at shopping malls and employee contact at one large 
company. Multiple regression was used to analyze the data.


\\\\\
Vulnerability, Defined and Experienced by Infertile Women, Within the Lazarus 
Stress and Coping Theory

Helen R. Hegna

Study identified the infertile treatment population's perception of 
vulnerability and created a vulnerability tool. Vulnerability, fit into the 
Lazarus Stress and Coping Theory, was applied. Questions: (1) How do women in 
treatment define vulnerability? and (2) do they experience it and what do they 
do as a result? Assumed that cognitive processes attached to emotions of 
fear-stress.

Infertility affects one in six couples and treatment may last years. Childless 
couples experience stress to bear children. Diagnosed infertile women who 
participate in treatment face uncertainty continually. Their cognitive 
perceptions that they may/may not become pregnant (threat to goal attainment) 
results in experiencing reactions of fear and ager. Studying stress and coping 
mechanisms profitable in assisting them.

For construction of the pilot instrument, five resolved infertile women, who 
identified with the populations's cognitive and emotional perceptions and 
reactions, were interviewed. Subsequently, the researcher developed 
Likert-type questionnaire was completed by six participants. The scale's 
Cronbach's alpha, above .70, indicated tool would describe and explain how 
these women defined and experienced vulnerability within the Lazarus 
framework.

Vulnerability was a negative feeling. Half felt vulnerable when starting 
infertility medications, others when menses began. All felt sad, most cried in 
isolation and some confided in significant other.


\\\\\
Arterial and Venous Oxygen Saturation Monitoring in Premature Infants - A 
Pilot Study

Shyang-Yun Pam K. Shiao, J. Gresky, and Y-J Chang

The purpose of this study is to determine the accuracy of a continuous 
monitoring system for venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) and arterial oxygen 
saturation (SaO2), using new three-wavelength catheters for 10 premature 
infants during the first 5 days of life. Premature infants suffer from 
oxygenation problem, and there is a fine line between oxygen sufficiency and 
oxygen toxicity in the care of these infants. SvO2 with SaO2 may provide a 
better picture of oxygenation in these infants.

SvO2 and SaO2 will be monitored through umbilical catheter lines, additionally 
the pulse oximeter (SpO2) will be monitored peripherally. These measurements 
will be refereneed to a newly improved cooximeter in laboratory every 8 hours. 
The laboratory test will include the measurements on fetal hemoglobin levels 
to determine the accurate oxygen saturation levels. A repeated measures ANOVA 
will be used to evaluate the accuracy of the monitoring devices. Infants will 
be followed for their hospital outcomes. This study will be the first to 
include fetal hemoglobin levels in the measurement of oxygen saturation and to 
provide SvO2 in addition to SaO2 and SpO2 data in premature infants.

\\\\\
Asthma Self-Care Education with African-American School Children

Barbara Velsor-Friedrich, Mary J. Denyes, Adrianne Louloudes, and Patrick Horn

Asthma is a chronic condition that affects 5-10% or about 4 million children 
in the country. Morbidity and rising mortality rates are of particilar concern 
in minority children. This study proposes to address a serious knowledge 
deficit about self-care management of asthma in minority children by testing 
the effect of a school-based asthma program on health and self-care on 8-12 
year old inner city students. Relationships in Orem's Self-Care Deficit Theory 
of Nursing will also be tested. It is hypothesized that: (1) self-care 
capabilities and self-care practice scores will be higher and that health 
measures will be significantly better after participation and at 2 weeks, 6 
and 12 months than before; and (2) that self-care capabilities and self-care 
practice scores will be higher and health measures will be signifiacantly 
better for a cohort that completes the program than for a similar cohort 
waiting to begin the program. Data from 120 students from eight schools will 
be obtained using measures of demographics, self-care capabilities, asthma 
self-care practices, and health. MANCOVA and multiple regression analyses will 
be used to test the hypotheses.


\\\\\
Child Pain: Differences in Perceptions of Pain Intensity and Perceived Ability 
to Manage Pain

Dianne Miller and Debbie Berry

Assuming pain is experienced by children as they describe it, this 
investigation, part of a larger descriptive study, focused on the interactive 
nature of pain perception: differences in perceptions of pain intensity 
between children, their mothers, and their nurses and mothers' and nurses' 
ability to manage pain. Using a convenience sample (n=255) of 75 sets of 
matched subjects (hospitalized child 3-18, the mother, and the nurse), 
simultaneous but independent pain intensity ratings (Wong-Baker Faces Scale) 
were collected from each set member. Mothers and nurses were also asked to 
rate their own ability to handle the child's pain on a 4-point scale. 
Significant differences in pain rating discrepancies between set-member pairs 
were tested using Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-ranks. Correlations between 
extent of discrepancy in pain ratings and rankings of ability to manage pain 
were tested using chi-square. Clinical implications for children's pain 
management with families will be discussed, including subject statements.


\\\\\
Child Pain: Mother's Competency in Pain Assessment, Knowledge of Pain in 
Children, and Perceived Ability to Manage Child Pain

Pati Pryor Huffman, Margo MacRobert, and Sheila Taylor Myers

Parental ability to perceive intensity of child pain is a component of pain 
management and, consequently, of parenting. As part of a larger descriptive 
investigation, the purpose of this study was to question associations between 
consistency in perception of pain between mother and child, the mothers' 
knowledge of child pain, and her perceived ability to manage the child's pain. 
Using a convenience sample (n=150) of 75 matched pairs of hospitalized 
children (3-18) and their mothers, pain intensity ratings (Wong-Baker Faces 
Scale) were collected independently from mother and child within a maximum 30 
minute time window. In face-to-face taped interviews, conducted by a clinical 
nurse specialist or pediatric nurse educator, mothers used a 4-point scale to 
show degree of agreement with 6 items concerning knowledge of child pain 
(Ferrell, et al) and their own ability to manage the child's pain. Chi-square 
established correlations between pain rating difference and knowledge of child 
pain and between rating difference and ability to manage pain. Clinical 
implications extend to potential nursing interventions for parental management 
of child pain.


\\\\\
Evaluation of the Effectiveness of an Elementary School-Based Victimization 
Strategy

Mary A. Megel, Bevely J. Hays, and Dick Oldfield

The U.S. Advisory Board on Child Ause and Neglect labeled child abuse a 
"national emergency." Public schools have been one of the more responsive 
institutions to this problem. This study employed a posttest-only control 
group design to assess the effects of a victimization pervention program on 
elementary school student anxiety, reporting of abuse, knowledge of general 
prevention concepts, and knowledge of difficult to acquire prevention 
concepts. The sample consisted of 1,269 children (658 experimental and 611 
control) in grades 1-6 in four public schools. Parental consent was obtained. 
Data were collected using the Revised Children's Manifest Anxiety Scale, the 
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children, and the Children's Knowledge of 
Abuse Questionnaire. Analyses using ANOVA and t test revealed that the 
experimental group at all grade levels demonstrated both significantly greater 
knowledge of general victimization prevention information, F(1, 245) = 131.88, 
p < .001, and difficult to acquire concepts, t(1, 266) = 7.23, p < .001. 
Additional analysis revealed that (a) when reassessed after 3 months, a 
subsample of the experimental group showed no decrease in acquired prevention 
information, (b) no differences in anxiety scores existed between groups, and 
(c) first-time student abuse disclosures were greater in the experimental 
group. These findings have important implications for elementary curricular 
design for abuse prevention and for the advocacy role of the school nurse.


\\\\\
Experiences of Pain and Comfort in Hospitalized Children

Shirley Wiggins, N. Hester, and R. Foster

Research indicates that lack of knowledge about pediatric pain contributes to 
ineffective nursing assessment and management of children's apin. The purpose 
of this study was to describe children's pain experiences from the perceptions 
of children and their parents. The Agency for Health Care Policy and research 
(AHCPR) guidelines were used as a framework for this qualitative-descriptive 
study. Data were gathered using the "Pain Experience History" as the interview 
guide. Interviews were completed with a sample of twenty-two verbal children 
and their parents and a sample of eleven parents of preverbal children. 
Questions on the "Pain Experience History" were open-ended, therefore content 
analysis was used to identify categories. Descriptive statistics (e.g. 
frequency distributions) were applied to the categores. Five themes emerged 
from the analysis of the child/parent interviews and included: How children 
share their experiences of pain; How children wanted others to help when they 
hurt; What children do not want when they hurt; How children help themselves 
when they hurt; and Who (educates) talks with children about their pain. 
Findings from the verbal child interviews also identified the words children 
used for pain and the comfort strategies they used. Of the 77% of the verbal 
children who reported their pain to someone, 64% of this group stated they 
report their pain to their parents. Eighty-two percent of the parents of 
preverbal children recognized their child's pain by a change in their crying 
pattern. Eighty-two percent of the parents of preverbal children and 68% of 
the verbal children reported they had not received pain management education. 
Conclusions derived from the findings indicated children can and do describe 
their painful experiences, but their responses differed by age; presence and 
touch are powerful comfort measures; children do attempt to comfort 
themselves, but also want others to help; and finally parents and children 
need to receive pain management education.


\\\\\
Expert Nurses' Lived Experiences of Giving Quality Care: What Makes the 
Difference?

Betsy Frank, Helene Eckrich, and Julie Rohr

Nurses can identify quality care indicators. Using primarily quantitative 
methods previous research has focused on the indicators while ignoring the 
context of the care given. The purpose of this study was to explore the lived 
experience of giving quality care. Seven expert nurses were interviewed. Data 
were analyzed using phenomenological mehtods outlined by Streubert (1991). 
Emerged themes descriptive of nurses' lived experience of giving quality care 
could be likened to playing a symphony. The theme of "leadership makes a 
difference" was evident through the nurse manager or conductor who set the 
tone and obtained resources. A second theme, "standards are the structure" 
seemed like a symphony score. Another theme, "collaboration and teamwork" 
showed the necessity for having staff (musicians) collaboration and 
cohesiveness. The expert nurses identified a fourth theme of "going beyond" or 
knowing what to do besides playing the written notes. A final theme was 
"maintaining excellence through training and education." Nurse administrators 
can use these findings to design environments which facilitate giving quality 
care.


\\\\\
Genogram Development to Assess Cardiovascular Risks in the School Aged Child

F. Wimbush and R. Peters

This pilot of one several in a longitudinal study to examine all risks related 
to cardiovascular disease in the same school-aged population. Family history 
of heart disease and increased risk is only 1 of 7 to be examined. The purpose 
of this study was to determine the ease of use of the Cardiovascular Genogram, 
one method of assessing the cardiovascular risk of the school-aged child. The 
instrument was pilot tested for content and ease of use with a structured 
interview and was found to be a valid and reliable method of obtaining a 
cardiovascular history for 3 generations. The risks have been categorized into 
primary, secondary and tertiary. Subjects are a convenience sample of the 
aprents of 100 5th and 6th grade students. Frequency tests will be used to 
determine the rate of return of the genogram. Percentages will report the 
number in each category. It is anticipated that the Parents' risk factors will 
be primary and secondary and that the next generation will be in all 3 
categories. We predict a return rate of 80% and that 75% of the families will 
have some cardiovascular risk factors.

\\\\\
Infant Pain Behaviors: A Meta-Analysis of Research

Donna Miles Curry

Research on infant pain is often limited by the small sample size and 
restrictions dealing with a nonverbal sample. This study was conducted to 
examine existing research on infant pain with the goal of identifying 
behaviors which can assist nurses in assessing pain and the effects of 
interventions to mediate pain. Initially a sample of 62 studies from 
biological, medical, psychological and nursing research were examined and 
coded but after excluding studies that lacked appropriate statistics the final 
meta-analysis was conducted on only 14 studies. Effect size was computed for 
several variables. Difficulties in analysis were encountered over the 
numerous, more than 27, different variables used to measure pain and the 
different methods used to measure even common variables such as crying. 
Implications include the need for more research and better reporting by 
researchers of statistics to allow their research to be better integrated into 
more generalizable findings.


\\\\\
Patterns of Parental Visitation to a Child in the Hospital

Congjit Saneha and JoAnne M. Youngblut

The purpose of this paper is to describe patterns of parents' visits to their 
hospitalized 3- to 8-year-old child and to identify factors related to these 
patterns. The convenience sample consisted of 26 mothers and 3 fathers of 29 
children admitted to the general care floor of a midwestern children's 
hospital. Parents completed the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Scale, a 24-
hour activity diary, and a questionnaire about transportation, cost, needs of 
other family members, and employment-related demands. Mean ages were 32.6 
(SD=7.48) years for parents and 5.4 (SD=1.65) years for the children; 23 
families (79%) had other children at home. 11 parents were employed. On the 
day of data collection, 14 parents stayed with the child continuously; the 
remaining parents spent an average of 9.9 hours with the child. Parents who 
stayed continuously reported lower trait anxiety, a decrease in personal 
hygiene and amount of alcohol consumed; they did not differ on state anxiety, 
education, number of other children, employment status, perceived severity of 
illness, ease of getting to the hospital, or distance from hospital, or 
children's anxiety scores. Implications for future research will be discussed.


\\\\\
Research by Committee: A Study of Child Pain Used as Case Example of A 
Strategy to Develop a Clinical Research Environment

Margo MacRobert and Sheila Taylor Myers

The critical nature of a questioning environment for nursing practice has been 
clearly established but maintaining clinical research commitments are 
threatened in the face of recent downsizing and work redesign. "Research by 
Committee" is a strategy developed by a 120 bed acute care children's hospital 
to involve all level of nursing in critical questioning while examining 
clincial problems contributing to the CHO standard of care. This presentation 
will identify supports and barriers, strengths and weakness, and rewards and 
costs of the strategy used in this hospital.


\\\\\
Review of Effects of Domestic Violence on Children

Janice M. Attala, Kerry Bauza, Heather Pratt, and Denise Vieira

The purpose of this study was to conduct an integrative review of research 
studies concerning "effects on children witnessing domestic violence." Data 
bases were selected from MEDLINE, CINAHL, Health and PsychoInfo. Inclusion 
criteria addressed primary research in refereed journals during the last two 
decades which focused on children who had witnessed domestic violence (n=14 
studies). There was general agreement that children from domestic violence 
families tended to have more difficulties than children from non-violent 
families. Multi-disciplinary findings revealed that effects of witnessing 
violence were serious, varied and generally framed in emotional and behavioral 
manefestations. A total of 912 children and their parents comprised the 
subjects of this review. Implications for clinical nursing research in this 
area are considerable and recommended.


\\\\\
Testing a Community-Based Model for School Nurses to Use with Adult High 
School Dropouts

Janet S. Barnfather and David L. Ronis

Adult high school dropouts are an underserved and virtually overlooked 
population at risk for unhealthy, unproductive lives. School nurses working 
with this population in adult education programs have examined how important 
constructs in the Modeling and Role-Modeling (MRM) theory and paradigm can be 
utilized in a community-based causal model. This study examines three specific 
MRM constructs, psychosocial development, basic needs and adaptive potential, 
and the influence these constructs have on health. Adult high school dropouts 
(N=190) returning to school completed self-report questionnaires which were 
designed to measure the identified MRM constructs. Using structural equation 
modeling, the hypothesized causal model fit the data extremely well (normed 
fit index .94; non-normed fit index .95; and comparative fit .98). Overall the 
model accounted for 55% of the variance in health. Psychosocial development 
was the best predictor of health. The best predictors of health will be useful 
in the next phase of this research program which involves designing and 
testing interventions for school nurses wthat will be conducted within a 
community-based approach.


\\\\\
A Comparison Between Sequential and Simultaneous Breast Pumping and Prolactin 
Levels

Pamela D. Hill, Jean C. Aldag, and Robert T. Chatterton

Mothers who must use milk expression techniques for a prolonged period 
frequently report decreasing milk volume over time. The purpose of this 
longitudinal pilot study was to compare the effects of sequential single vs 
simultaneous double breast pumping on milk volume and prolactin levels in 
mothers of preterm infants who mechanically expressed for a minimum of 5 weeks 
postpartum. Nine lactating mothers were randomly assigned to a sequential 
single or simultaneous double electric breast pumping system. Prolactin levels 
were measured in four mothers on days 21 and 42 postpartum. For the sequential 
single and simultaneous double groups, mean baseline prolactin levels were 
50.8 ng/ml and 40.6 ng/ml. respectively on day 21, and 26.6 ng/ml and 34.5 
ng/ml, respectively on day 42 postpartum. At 9 and 12 weeks postpartum, 
mothers were queried about their lactational status. The results suggested 
that milk yield may be maintained or increased with frequent use of the 
simultaneous double pumping system. Further study is needed to confirm results 
of this pilot study related to single vs double pumping and to determine if 
prolactin levels in mothers of preterm infants are similar to mothers of term 
infants.


\\\\\
Dyspnea and Anxiety in Patients with COPD: The Potential Role of Music

Sandra McBride, J. Graydon, S. Sidani, and L. Hall
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating disorder that 
is frequently characterized by feelings of dyspnea and/or anxiety. There are 
relatively few studies examining interventions aimed directly at the relief of 
dyspnea and anxiety. Music has been found to reduce anxiety and promote 
relaxation in populations other than individuals with COPD. The purpose of 
this longitudinal study is to determine the feasibility of examining the 
effect of music on the anxiety and dyspnea of patients with COPD who are 
living at home where the use of music is initiated and applied by subjects at 
their convenience. Martha Rogers' (1986) science of unitary human beings will 
be used as the broad underpinning of the study. A convenience sample of 30 
subjects with a diagnosis of COPD who report experiencing dyspnea at least 
once a day will be recruited. Measures of anxiety, current dyspnea, 
demographic profile, music preference, and music use and effect will be 
collected during a five week period. Anxiety will be measured by the 
Spielberger (1970) state anxiety scale. Dyspnea will be measured by both a 
visual analogue scale and a dyspnea rating scale. Descriptive statistics will 
be used to determine 1) the socio-demographic and illness-related 
characteristics; 2) the subjects' use of music; 3) the frequency of 
experiencing dyspnea and the frequency of music use over the three week 
period; and 4) the intensity of perceived dyspnea before and after music, over 
the three week period. Chi square goodness-of-fit test will be computed to 
determine if telephone interviews will yield as complete data as home 
interviews. Pearson correlation will be calculated to determine the 
relationship between the dyspnea rating scale and the visual analogue scale.


\\\\\
Effect of FAmily Focused Developmental Care on Mothers of Preterm Infants

Judith A. Heermann, K. Walburn, and L. Hall

Mothers of preterm infants in the NICU are unable to fulfill the expected 
maternal role lowering their maternal self-esteem and confidence (adaptation 
to mothering). This modifies their behavior and compromises infants' 
development. Evidence suggests Family Focused Developmental Cre (FFDC), based 
on the theory of synactive development, promotes satisfying patterns of 
communication and interaction between mother and infant which fosters maternal 
self-esteem and adaptation to mothering. The study's purpose is to test the 
effectiveness of an FFDC educational program in initiating nurse-provided FFDC 
in a NICU by measuring maternal sefl-esteem (Maternal Self-Report Inventory 
[MSI]) and adaptation to mothering (what Being The Parent of a New Baby is 
Like [WPL-R]). Subjects are 2 groups of 25 mother-infant dyads with infants 
27-34 wks. gestation, in the NICU for 28 days or more, and mothers who agree 
to visit infants weekly. Using a phase-lag design, phase 1 is following the 
control group receiving traditional care; phase 2 is the FFDC educational 
program presented to 8 nurses, and phase 3 is following the group receiving 
FFDC. Measures are demographics and MSI on entering study; WPL-R, MSI, and 
social support (SSS) at 1 mo.; and Neonatal Morbidity Scale (NMS). Differences 
between groups' MSI and WPL-R scores will be tested via ANCOVAs. Covariates 
will be SSS and NMS. Results will reveal whether the FFDC program is an 
efficient, effective, and feasible means of initiating such care.


\\\\\
The Effect of Ultrasonography and Gravidity on Maternal-Fetal Attachment

Margaret Ofe Campbell, Diane G. Brage, and Susan M. Elek

The purposes in conducting this study were to describe (a) relationships 
between maternal-fetal attachment and pertinent demographic variables, and (b) 
the effect of ultrasonography and gravidity on maternal-fetal attachment. A 
convenience sample (N=63) consisting of midwestern women (20 primigravidas and 
43 multigravidas) experiencing uncomplicated pregnancies completed the 
Prenatal Maternal Attachment Scale. Bowlby's (1958) theiry of attachment and 
Rubin's (1984) pregnancy adaptation theory were utilized to guide this 
investiagtion. The results of a Spearman rho rorrelation indicated maternal-
fetal attachment was not significantly related to ultrasonography, 
intendedness of pregnancy, gravidity, educational level, income, maternal age, 
and marital status. The effect of ultrasonography and gravidity on maternal-
fetal attachment revealed no significant interaction effects. However, a t-
test for Prenatal Maternal Attachment Scale scores comparing primigravidas who 
received ultrasonography with those who did not receive ultrasonography ws 
significant; those primigravidas who recieved ultrasonography exhibited 
significantly higher attachment scores (t(9)=2.20; p=.04). Through 
ultrasonography, health care providers can be instrumental in fostering 
maternal attachment and awareness.


\\\\\
FAmily-Provider Realtionships: Impact on Satisfaction with Care and Well-Being 
in Families with Children who have Down Syndrome

Marcia Van Riper

The purpose of this study was to explore links between parental perceptions of 
amily-provider relationships, satisfaction with care and well-being in 
families with children who have Down syndrome. Mailed questionnaires were used 
to collect data from 111 parents. A series of data analytic strategies (e.g., 
regression analyses, ANOVAs and a MANOVA) was employed to assess the data 
obtained. Overall, the results of this study suggest that when parents of 
children with Down syndrome have positive beliefs about family-provider 
relationships, tehy feel more satisfied with the care that their child is 
receiving. In addition, when a discrepancy exists between what parents want 
the family-provider relationship to be like and what they believe the 
relationship is like, parents feel less satisfied with the care that their 
child is recieving. Finally, the results suggest that when parents describe 
their family's relationship with health care providers as positive and family-
centered, they report higher levels of individual and family well-being.


\\\\\
Fatigue and Anergy Levels of Women at 14 to 19 Months Postpartum Compared to 
Fatigue and Anergy Levels at 6 Weeks Postpartum

Nancy W. Troy

Fatigue can adversely effect the quality of the mother-child relationship, the 
marital relationship, and the woman's overall quality of life. It has been 
assumed that women recover from pregnancy and childbirth within six weeks. 
However, women have been found to be more tired at 6 weeks postpartum than 
healthy mena nd women who are not parenting (Troy, 1994). Studies examining 
women's experiences through 12 onths postpartum report fatigue to be one of 
their top three complaints. The purposes of this descriptive, correlational 
study were to: determine the difference in primiparous women's morning and 
evening fatigue and energy levels at 6 weeks postpartum and 14 to 19 months 
postpartum and the amount and quality of nighttime sleep, mood, return to 
functional status after childbirth, gratification in the mothering role, and 
social stress levels/life change events at 14 to 19 months postpartum. 
Participants from a previous postpartum fatigue study were telephoned and 
asked if they would consider participating in this current study. A total of 
27 women completed all of the self-report instruments. Preliminary analyses 
suggest that the women are more gfatigued and less energetic in the evening 
now and more energetic and less fatigued in the morning now than they were at 
6 weeks postpartum. The quality of sleep does not seem to correlate with the 
self-reports of fatigue and energy in either the morning or evening. The vast 
majority are working now with a mean of 35 hours worked per week (SD-10.5). 
They seem very gratified with their role as mother, but may be somewhat 
depressed in general. The women have made an almost complete return to 
funcational status after childbirth with selfcare and social/community 
activities slightly less complete than house work, infant care, and outside 
employment. They seem to be experiencing mild life crises of various sorts. 
The results of this study provide a better understanding of the 14 to 19 
months postpartum woman's quality of life (in terms of the variables measured) 
and a longitudinal comparison of fatigue and energy levels.


\\\\\
An In-Home Toy Assessment of Infant Information Processing

Karen Pridham, Patricia Becker, Suzanne Thoyre, Lorna Cisler-Cahill, and Wai 
Fong Kwak

An infant's attention to toys during free play alone or with mother provides 
information about cognitive competence (Landry & Chapieski, 1988; Rose, 
Feldman & Wallace, 1992; Ruff & Lawson, 1991). A brief in-hom assessment of 
casual and focused attention to toys are healthy, term infants (n=53) and 
premature infants with either resolved acute or chronic lung disease (n=49) 
was administered at 8 months post-term age (PTA). The assessment included 
infant play with a set of toys (Alone) and with mother (Interact). The video-
taped session was coded in real time with a computerized system; inter-coder 
agreement averaged 72%. Focused attending for both Alone and Interact was 
related (p<.05) to the 12-month Bayley Mental Index (r=.24 and .23, 
respectively). Infants with chronic lung disease paid less attention to toys 
when alone but not with mother. The toy assessment offers nurses a way to 
explore infant learning from objects and response to maternal structuring of 
play.


\\\\\
Outcomes of Obstetric Early Discharge Interventions

Janice G. rustia, E. Gibbs, and N. Tourek

This is a report of a pilot study that is in progress. The purpose of the 
research is to determine the combination of nursing interventions that are 
most effective in facilitating parental dyad transition to parenthood 
following the birth of their first infant. The sample consists of 128 first-
time parents experiencing normal pregnancies and deliveries who deliver normal 
infants that meet the criteria for inclusion, and who are obtaining their 
obstetrical services at a local hospital. Equal samples of parents who either 
participated or did not participate in prenatal classes are being admitted to 
the study. A comparative design is being used in which the outcomes of a 
standard program of nursing interventions are compared with the outcomes of a 
modified program of nursing interventions. Multiple before and after 
intervention measures of outcome will be obtained, with data collection points 
transcending organizational boundaries, utilizing a core battery of 
instruments. Methods of analysis will include reliability assessments, 
descritpive statistics, and ANOVA's.


\\\\\
Perceptions of Early Postpartum Discharge: Views of Nurses in Acute Care and 
Home Care

Patsy L. Ruchala and Dotti C. James

Maternity nurses, who have traditionally found their roles providing 
assessment, support, and teaching to new mothers and babies in acute care 
settings, now have less time for these activities during the shortened 
hospital stay. Using a phenomonological approach for inquiry, this study 
explores, from the perspective of nurses in both acute care and home care 
settings, the impact of early discharge on the nursing care provided to new 
mothers and babies. A random sample of nurses from both acute care (n=5) and 
home health (n=5) were interviewed. All participants were Registered Nurses 
and had at least two years of experience in providing nursing care to new 
mothers and babies. Audio-taped interviews were transcribed verbatim, and 
constant comparative analysis was used to identify recurring themes. Finding 
indicate that (a) there is a need for "transitional communication" between the 
acute care and home care settings; (b) nurses view early discharge as 
advantageous for neither nurses nor patients; and (c) nurses feel that it 
would be beneficial to implement postpartum teaching prenatally. The 
significance and implications for nursing include both the determination of 
essential nursing interventions and influencing health care policy for new 
mothers and babies.


\\\\\
Predictors of Quality of Life in Heart Failure

Linda S. Baas, Joyce A. Fontana, Lynne E. Wagoner, and Geetha Bhat

Quality of life (QOL) is a major concern in persons with heart failure (HF). 
Two measures of QOL are life satisfaction (LS) and activity. A sample of 38 
persons with HF was surveyed: 23 were managed medically, 8 were awaiting 
transplantation, and 7 were one month post-transplantation. The sample was 
predominately male (69%), married (76%), and caucasian (90%) with a mean age 
of 51 + 2 years. No differences were found among groups on the subjective and 
objective QOL variables; thus the three groups were combined for subsequent 
analyses. LS, as measured by the Index of Well-Being, was predicted by 
internal and external resources available [R2=.43, F=11.7, df 2,31, p<.0002]. 
Subjects reported that the availability of resources (111 + 3) exceeded their 
needs (107 + 4). Scores on the Human Activity Profile were predicted by 
symptoms as measured by the Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire [R2=.37, 
df 1,31, p<.05]. More importantly, left ventricular ejection traction (LVEF) 
did not enter into either regression model; furthermore, symptoms did not 
predict LS. These findings support placing more importance on the patient's 
reports rather than the objective measures like LVEF when assessing QOL. 
Furthermore, in the early period post-transplantation, there were no 
differences in LS, activity level, or resources needed and available. These 
subjects will be followed to examine differences over time.


\\\\\
Prenatal Substance Abuse Exposure: Effects on the Maternal-Infant Interaction

Rosemary Liguori

This study investigated the effects of exposure to cocaine on vocal, visual, 
tactile and mutual gaze interactions of 60 neonates (2-28 days of age) and 
their mothers. Mother-infant interaction was videotaped by the investigator in 
the subject's home; the Broussard Neonatal Perception Inventory (NPI) was 
completed by the mother to examine maternal perceptions. The Parent Interview 
form was used to obtain demographic information. Findings did not support the 
hypothesis that significant differences would occur in the duration and 
frequencies of interactive behaviors between the two groups, nor were 
significant differences found in interaction by infant gender and drug group. 
According to the NPI, mothers in both groups perceived their infants 
positively. This data suggests that use of cocaine prenatally does not affect 
the overall quantity of mother-infant interaction in the first month of life. 
A qualitative investigation of the cocaine exposed dyad seems warranted, since 
differences were noted anecdotally.


\\\\\
Preventive Nutrition and Prenatal Infant Care Outcomes

Bernadette Butler and K. Otero

Food products ingested and other elements used by the pregnant woman are known 
to effect patterns of growth and development in the embryo and fetus while in 
utero. A pilot study, of 100 subjects, to determine the effectiveness of the 
Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children, known as WIC, was 
conducted in a large private urban community facility. Fifty non-WIC 
mother/infant dyads and fifty WIC mother/infant dyads were randomly selected 
in a retrospective chart review study. Preliminary results indicate a 
significant difference in the infants' birth weight. Implications may mean 
that a different manner of care for the WIC mother/infant dyads could increase 
infant birth weights as indicated by the non-WIC dyads.


\\\\\
Self-Care Actions to Manage Fatiguein Myasthenia Gravis

Mary E. Grohar-Murray and A. Becker

The neuromuscular disease Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is known to produce fatigue, 
it is also the most frequently reported symptom by MG patients (Ochs, 1991). 
Despite fatigue's prevalence, no protocols exist for it's treatment, thus 
patients are left to self-manage. The purpose of this study was to describe 
self-care actions used to manage fatigue among patients with MG. A national 
sample (N=250) of MG patients responded to two structured instruments, The 
Fatigue Survey, (FS), modified with permission of authors Hubsky and Sears; 
and the Myasthenia Gravis Fatigue Scale (MGFS). The theoretical foundation for 
both instruments was based on the construct of fatigue. Subjects identified 
three major categories of self-care actions, 1) mental interventions (76%), 2) 
physical interventions (78%), and 3) rest/sleep (80%). A subset of the 
respondents (N=36) reported using aerobic exercise (usually contradicted with 
MG) to attempt to relieve fatigue with no significant difference found in 
fatigue scores between N=25 reporting aerobic exercise to be helpful with N=11 
finding exercise not helpful. However, those utilizing aerobic exercise 
reported the highest functional status categories. A question arises as to 
cause and effect; that is, is aerobic exercise performed by the least ill MG 
patients, or does aerobic exercise improve functional status? When 
demographic, illness related, and functional status variables were associated 
with fatigue scores, and self-care actions, only gender, and functional status 
were significantly correlated with fatigue score. Effective self-care actions 
include stress reduction techniques, pacing all activities, and increasing 
rest and sleep. Further investigation into the role of aerobic exercise is 
indicated as a self-care action for MG fatigue.


\\\\\
The Relationship Between Patterns of Breastfeeding in the First Three Days of 
Life and Jaundice Levels in Normal Newborns

Diane B. Boyer and E. Fowles

A majority of previous studies have found more jaundice in breast-fed than 
bottle-fed babies in the first 72 hours of life (HOL). However, a review 
indicates that natural breastfeeding (defined as feeding within the first 
postnatal hour, a frequency of feeding of at least 9-12 times/day, and no 
artificial supplementation) was not being investigated. Concern over jaundice 
even in apparently healthy term newborns' sometimes leads to the interruption 
of breastfeeding during this critical early period, thus jeopardizing 
breastfeeding success. The purpose of this study was to investigate the 
relationship between patterns of breastfeeding in the first 72 HOL and 
jaundice levels at 48 and 12 HOL. Research questions included: Is there a 
relationship between jaundice levels at 48 and 72 HOL and a) time of initial 
breastfeeding; b) frequency of feedings; c) cumulative total minutes of 
breastfeeding; d) supplementation vs. non-supplementation. The sample 
consisted of 56 normal white mothers and newborns. 10 from a tertiary care 
center, 18 from a community hospital and 28 from a home birth practice, who 
gave informed consent for the study. Independent variables were measured by 
chart review and self-report by mothers. The dependent variable, jaundice 
level, was measured by transcutaneous determination of jaundice by the 
Minolta/Air Shields Jaundice Meter within the first 12 HOL and at 48 and 72 
HOL. A subset of the sample also had serum bilirubin determinations done at 
the same time blood was drawn for PKU testing. Data are being analyzed by 
calculation of correlation coefficient, Chi-square analysis or fisher's exact 
test as appropriate to answer the research questions. Determining a pattern of 
feeding which will result in decreased jaundice will promote successful 
breastfeeding while decreasing health care costs associated with the diagnosis 
and treatment of jaundice in newborns.


\\\\\
Alcohol Use During Pregnancy: Testing a Theory

Karen W. Budd and Greer Glazer

Although Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) is the only cause of mental retardation 
that can be prevented, there is a surprising lack of prenatal alcohol use 
theory that can be used to develop efficacious FAS prevention programs. 
Hypotheses of causal factors and relationships among factors must be tested. 
Using a case-control design, three groups of women (N=165) identified as 
alcohol users (cases), nonusers (controls), and never users (controls) are 
being selected at an inner-city prenatal clinic. Physical and psychosocial 
measures of variables known or theorized to be related to prenatal alcohol use 
are being administered. These variables are stress, self-coherence, self-care 
capacity, mastery, maternal self-concept, social support, coping, self-esteem, 
and maternal care capacity. Multivariate and path analyses will be employed to 
examine associations among the variables and prenatal alcohol use. Preliminary 
or final findings will be reported.


\\\\\
Development of a Visiting Contract in a Coronary Care Unit (CCU)

Linda L. Lazure

Patient-nurse-family visiting contracts have been shown to be effective in 
enhancing CCU patients' sense of personal control (Ziemann & Dracup, 1990; 
Brannon, Brady, & Gailey, 1990). The purpose of this study was to develop a 
patient-nurse-family visiting contract for use in future research based on the 
investigator's dissertation study of patient control of family visitation in 
the CCU. A collaboratively developed survey of CCU patient, family, and staff 
visitation preferences was distributed to 60 CCU patients, their families, 
and, CCU staff. Data were analyzed by the investigator and CCU staff and used 
to develop a "contract" which consisted of a series of interchangeable 
preference options printed on red, green, or yellow cards. The cards will be 
displayed outside the patient's door to inform potential visitors about the 
patient's visiting preferences in a subsequent study. It is hoped that this 
investigation will add to both nursing and medical knowledge.


\\\\\
A Phenomenological Study of Chronic Nonmalignant Pain

Angeline M. Gliniecki, Zxy-Yann Jane Lu, and Nori I. Komorita

Chronic nonmalignant pain is a poorly understood subjective phenomenon 
impacting millions of people. A phenomenological research approach attempts to 
provide an understanding of the meaning of lived experience. Such an 
understanding may reveal aspects of the experience unknown or misinterpreted 
by those who do not live it. This may lead to more effective treatments and 
improved quality of life, yet little phenomenological work was found in the 
literature on pain. The sample interviewed was solicited from the general 
population of a midwestern city and consisted of 4 men and 7 women, all 
Caucasian between 22 and 66 years old. Cause varied, but duration of pain 
ranged from 6 to 50 years. Analysis followed Colaizzi's method. Thirteen 
themes emerged from the data and 3 major concepts, loss of control, social 
support, and acceptance, were identified as important areas to be addressed in 
future work.

\\\\\
Spouse Influence on Patient Recovery Following Coronary Artery Bypass Graft 
(CABG) Surgery

Nancy T. Artinian

The purposes of this study were to: a) describe relationships among perceived 
spouse support behaviors, spouse anxiety, spouse coping styles and patient 
recovery following CABG surgery; and b) determine which spouse related 
variables are most predictive of patient recovery six weeks after hospital 
discharge. Family systems theory provided the theoretical basis for the study. 
The study used a descriptive longitudinal design. Data were collected from 121 
patient-spouse pairs at the following times: prior to hospital discharge and 
at one and six weeks afler discharge. Data were collected using eight reliable 
and valid instruments that were administered by interview and mail 
questionnaires. At six weeks, there were significant relationships between 
spouse anxiety and total patient dysfunction (r=.20, p=.05), patient 
depression (r=.32, p=.01), and level of patient symptoms, (r=.33, [=.01). 
Patient self-esteem was related to spouse support at 1 week (r=.17, p=.05) and 
6 weeks (r=.15, p=.05). Spouse support and spouse anxiety contributed varying 
amounts of variance to select aspects of recovery. Further study is needed 
before definite conclusions can be made. However, data suggest spouses and 
patients influence one another during recovery and support allocating 
resources to provide care to both patients and spouses after CABG surgery.


\\\\\
Use of Cold Therapy on Pain in the Total Knee Replacement (TKR) Patient

Joyce Crutchfield, L. Zimmerman, and S. Barnason

In addition to using medication for managing postoperative pain for the 
orthopaedic population, some clinicians are advocating the use of continuous 
cold therapy in the immediate postoperative period as a mechanism for 
decreasing pain. The purpose of this pilot study was to examine the influence 
of cold therapy during the postoperative period for patients undergoing TKR. 
Twenty-eight subjects were randomly assigned to receive a constant cold 
machine (CCM) or the standard ice bag in the immediate postoperative period. 
Pain scores (as measured by the McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ) and numeric 
rating scale (NRS), were obtained on each of the subjects. The mean age was 
72, and the majority were female, Caucasian, married and retired. Descriptive 
statistics were employed and pain was evaluated by comparing day and night 
time pain. in addition there were some subjects who chose not to use the ice 
bag in day-time measures, pain in the CCM group was the only group which 
appeared to decrease over time and the other groups were inconsistent. 
However, for the night-time ratings, the CCM and ice bag groups appeared to 
have a gradual decrease in pain over time as compared to the group who 
received neither. A larger sample size is needed to more fully understand the 
use of different cold methods and their influence on day and night time pain.


\\\\\
Impact of the Threat of War on Military Children

Nancy Ryan-Wenger

US military personnel constantly train in preparation for war. But how 
prepared are their children for war? To what extent does living with the 
threat of war cause fear, anxiety or other emotional responses in military 
children? How do children cope with this pervasive threat to their security 
and family structure? Triangulation of data collection methods (interview, 
self-report questionnaires, projective techniques) are used to address the 
specific aims of this study, which are to compare children of active duty, 
reserve and civilian families with respect to: 1) their perceptions of war; 2) 
origin of fears related to war; 3) levels of manifest anxiety; 4) coping 
strategies; and 5) projection of emotional problems in drawings. The 
theoretical framework underlying this study is an integration of Lazarus' 
stress and coping paradigm and Rachman's theory of fear acquisition. A power 
analysis for ANOVA indicated that 52 children per group are needed, for a 
total of 156 children, ages 8 to 11 yrs. The sample is geographically, 
racially, and socioeconomically diverse; Army, Navy and Air Force families are 
equally represented in the active duty and reserve groups. Group comparisons 
will be made by using ANOVA or chi square. Both qualitative and quantitative 
comparisons of the structured interviews will be done with a computerized 
contextual content analysis program. Study results, to be completed by June, 
1996, may provide direction for anticipatory guidance and nursing 
interventions for children of military families.


\\\\\
Sibling Percpetions of Childhood Physical and Mental Chronic Illness: 
Secondary Analysis of Three Data Sets

Agatha M. Gallo, Sandra A. Faux, and John M. Rowe

The purpose of this analysis was to examine the perceptions of 6-16 year old 
siblings about their ill siblings' illness. Using a non-categorical approach, 
three sibling data sets were combined and analyzed using secondary 
interpretive analysis techniques. A combined sample of 96 participants was 
created from three studies: 42 siblings of children with cranialfacial and 
cardiac defects; 28 siblings of children with diabetes, asthma, and arthritis; 
and 24 siblings of children with a chronic psychiatric diagnosis. Similar 
semistructured interview guides were used in the three studies. Secondary 
analysis was done on the verbatim transcripts of the original interviews. 
Thematic analysis focused on the sibling's knowledge (diagnosis, treatment, 
timing of information), and communications among family members about the 
illness. The extent and quality of knowledge was found to be dependent on 
diagnosis, illness visibility, behavioral expression, and family communication 
patterns. Implications for nursing practice include assessment of sibling 
knowledge and development of age and diagnosis specific appropriate 
interventions.


\\\\\
Stress Appraisal, Self-Esteem and Perceived Control Among Adult Males

K. Renee Twibell

Stress appraisals of threat and challenge are associated with health outcomes 
in Lazarus and Folkman's (1984) theory of stress and coping. Psychometrically 
sound measures of threat and challenge appraisal are necessary to predict 
health outcomes in persons who face stressful situations. Evidence exists to 
support reliability of the BT Challenge Instrument (BTCI) and the Moneyham 
Threat Index (MTI). Construct validity of the two instruments has been 
examined by factor analysis. Further assessment of construct validity is 
needed to support the use of the instruments in nursing studies of 
stress-related variables. The purpose of the study is to examine the construct 
validity of the BTCI and MTI by comparison of scores on the instruments with 
scores on known measures of related variables. Lazarus and Folkman propose 
that stress appraisals are related to perceptions of self-esteem and perceived 
control. Therefore, the study tests the relationship between challenge 
appraisal, threat appraisal, self-esteem and locus of control in a sample of 
adult males (n=16O). Quantitative measures were completed anonymously. Data 
analysis includes Pearson r correlations, ANOVA, and an examination of 
age-related differences in scores. Results may offer further support for the 
validity of two measures of stress appraisal, which nurses may use to predict 
health outcomes and evaluate effectiveness of strategies. In addition, the 
results may refute or support tenets of Lazarus and Folkman's theory.

\\\\\
Suicidal Inpatients' Experience of Constant Observation

Carol Rogers Pitula and Rebecca Cardell

Protection is the presumed goal of constant observation (CO), the 
uninterrupted observation of inpatients to prevent suicide. However, there is 
controversy about who or what is being protected. Additionally, references to 
negative patient experiences such as loss of dignity and control appear in the 
clinical literature. Concerns about the limits and effectiveness of this 
intervention linger because of the lack of research. To understand the 
patient's perspective on the experience of constant observation (CO), seven 
male and seven female inpatients' responses to in-depth interviews about their 
perceptions of and reactions to CO were analyzed using a qualitative 
methodology. Participants responses were organized around two positive and one 
negative theme: physical protection, restoration of hope, and adverse effects. 
Participants reported that CO was beneficial not only because it preserved 
physical safety but also because interactions with staff restored hope. On the 
negative side, the absence of supportive interactions and frequent staff 
changes adversely affected the CO experience.


\\\\\
Wounds Become Gifts: The Process of Transilience in Adult Children of 
Alcoholic Parents

Ann E. Cook

The problem in this study was that disproportionately greater attention has 
been paid to the untoward effects of parental alcoholism on adult offspring 
than to the potential positive outcomes. The purpose in this study was to 
explore and discover how adult children of alcoholic parents (ACOAs) have 
achieved satisfactory life adjustments. A grounded theory study was conducted 
to answer these research questions: What is the social-psychological process 
by which adult children of alcoholic parents achieve self-perceived positive 
life outcomes? What are the experiences of adult children of alcoholic parents 
which contribute to their self-identified successful life adjustments? 
Subjects included 27 adults who identified themselves as ACOAs and perceived 
that they have achieved positive life outcomes. The product of this study was 
a substantive theory describing the experiences of ACOAs who perceive they 
have attained positive life outcomes. The basic social-psychological process 
was transilience, defined as the process whereby these ACOAs moved from the 
condition of life in their alcoholic families to a self-identified state in 
which their perceived life outcomes were positive and their overall life 
adjustments satisfactory. Major components of transilience included living in 
the alcoholic family, apprehending the old reality, relinquishing the old 
reality, and constructing the new reality. Encountering critical junctures 
facilitated either a more rapid progression to the next phase or a temporary 
retrogression to earlier phases until appropriate resolution occurred. The 
ongoing outcome of transilience was positive life outcomes and satisfactory 
life adjustments, which are described in the study.


\\\\\
Clinical Judgement Related to Reducing the Falls Among Geriatric In-Patients

B. Turkoski, J. Salter, R. Brady, J. Guhda, L. Pierce, R. Radziewicz, and S. 
Shreck

In-patient among elderly clients remain a major concern for nurses practicing 
in geriatric settings despite a significant body of empirical investigations 
that have addressed the causes of in-patient falls and evaluated a variety of 
prevention programs. This study differs from these traiditional approaches and 
focuses on how practicing nurses think about and make decisions related to in-
patient falls. The study was grounded in the theory that there are 
discretionary nursing behaviors realted to expertise in nursing, i.e., 
preventing in-patient falls, that are proactive and anticipatory. Subjects 
(n+14) were self-selected RNs employed in a geriatric rehabilitation setting 
who participated in in-dept interviews. Anonymous transcriptions of each 
interview were analyzed, not just for individual linguistic components, but 
for zones of association and contextual relationships. Analyses identified 
four major themes found in all interviews. Within each area there were also 
subthemes that were identified: 1) why in-patients fall: mentation, 
inappropriate physical activity, desire for indepndence, relationship with 
staff; 2) identifying potential fallers: patient behaviors/feelings, patient 
orientation, nurse behaviors; 3) preventing patient falls; communication, 
clinical knowledge, experience, intuition; and 4) nurses' subjective response 
to patient falls: guilt, anger, blame. Discussion of these themes focuses on 
the expressions and phrasing that subjects used to describe their though 
processes or behaviors relating to inpatient falls. Results of this study make 
a valuable contribution to current knowledge about elderly in-patient falls, 
and serves as an impetus for further falls research; especially research that 
focuses on education for clinical decision making.


\\\\\
Construct Validity of Two Instruments for Geriatric Depression: A Factor 
Analytic Investigation

Lisa L. Onega

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the construct validity of the 
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD) and the Dementia Mood Assessment 
Scale (DMAS) in assessing community-dwelling elders for depression. 
Conceptually meaningful factor structures were identified for the HRSD and the 
DMAS in a primary sample of 206 community-dwelling elders and in replication 
subsamples. The primary HRSD factor analysis using quartimax rotation 
accounted for 57.7% of the variance. The factors were retained. Depressed 
Affect, Vegetative Symptoms, Anxiety, and Agitation/Insight.  The primary DMAS 
factor analysis using varimax rotation accounted for 63.2% of the variance. 
The following five factors were retained: Depressed Affect, Environmental 
Interaction, Daily Patterns, Agitation/Suspiciousness, and Somatic Indicators.

The comparison of the factor structures of these instruments yielded new 
insights into their value as corroborative instruments in assessing geriatric 
depression and clarified differential components of geriatric depression as 
assessed by the HRSD and the DMAS. The findings of this research served both 
to improve clinicians' ability to assess geriatric depression using the HRSD 
and the DMAS and to more precisely define geriatric depression based on the 
derived factor structures of these two instruments.


\\\\\
Continuity of Care Research: Lessons Learned

Mary Ann Anderson, Mark Foreman, and Saundra Theis

Organizations providing care to elderly patients are greater in number and 
more highly specialized. The problems of continuity between organizations 
providing health care is much discussed, but rarely investigated. Continuity 
of care by definition has a time component, suggesting research methods 
employing a longitudinal approach. However, published studies are primarily 
cross-sectional in design. This study examined organizational transitions of 
elderly patients who had manifested an episode of acute confusion while 
hospitalized. Thirty patients were to have been enrolled and followed for six 
months, in order to generate interventions appropriate for improving care. 
Data collection involved medical record review, interviews of the identified 
patients, their families, primary nurses and other care providers, at several 
points in time. Unanticipated issues of research design as well as 
organizational and sociological dynamics of the rapidly changing health care 
delivery system, variables not well addressed in either the nursing research 
or continuity of care literatures, were problematic. This experience provides 
perspectives for designing future investigations of continuity of care with 
elderly patients.


\\\\\
Effects of Multiple Environmental Distracters on Wayfinding

Barbara Therrien and Robert Hill

This study explored the effects of multiple environmental distracters on 
wayfinding ability using an established model of disorientation. Adult male 
(n=24) and female (n=23) rats received bilateral hippocampal lesions or sham 
surgery (controls). Animals had completed an initial wayfinding task with an 
audio-visual cue and one visual distracter. In this study, four additional 
distracters were introduced into the test environment. Comparison of the final 
days of the two protocols showed the animals to be more distracted by multiple 
distracters than by a single one. The directional heading error was greater 
with multiple distracters (X=54.6 degress) than with the single distracter 
(X=47.1 degress). Lesioned ainmals were more distractible when compared to 
controls (X=56.6 degress vs X=51.6 degress, respectively). Interestingly, time 
taken to reach the goal was comparable between male controls and male 
bilateral lesioned animals, but the females with hippocampal (HPC) damage took 
significantly more time to reach the goal. We concluded that, in the presence 
of multiple environmental distracters, wayfinding performance of all animals 
was more impaired than with one distracter. There was no progressive 
improvement in directional heading error or time taken to reach the goal for 
all groups over the four days of testing. It appeared that female animals were 
more distractible than males, and female animals with bilateral hippocampal 
lesions were most impaired. We then examined mean swim time for female animals 
with high estrogen levels (proeserus or estrus) versus those with low estrogen 
levels (metestrus or diestrus). No significant differences were apparent 
between the two control groups. Interestingly, females with bilateral HPC 
damage in proestrus or estrus on the first testing day, performed as well as 
controls over the four test days. In contrast, females with bilateral damage, 
beginning the learning task in metestrus or diesrus, took two to three times 
as long to locate the goal on all test days. These data strongly suggest that 
estrogen levels influence spatial learning and distractibility.


\\\\\
Graphical Modeling to Uncover Hidden Relationships in a Multidimensional 
Problem

Sandra R. Edwardson and Katherine Dean

The availability of desktop computers capable of sophisticated statistical 
modeling can lead researchers to use methods to analyze data that fail to meet 
the assumptions of the methods. In a study of self-care behavior in an elderly 
popalation, a graphical interaction modeling technique (DIGRAM) was contrasted 
with more widely used statistical techniques. Graphical modeling, a subclass 
of log linear models, is capable of analyzing large contingency tables and 
permits examination of hypothesized patterns of associations and dependencies 
in a multidimensional problem. In contrast to multivariate regression 
modeling, the technique uses partial correlations and partial covariance 
structures. It does not assume that variables are continuous and normally 
distributed, a condition common in studies using psychosocial variables.

The method was applied to data gathered in face-to-face interviews with a 
sample of 608 elderly people living independently in the community. Subjects 
were asked to identify symptoms experienced in the prior month and responded 
to instruments evaluating the symptom experience, social support, and personal 
functioning. Findings suggest the importance of social connectedness and 
gender in making appropriate responses to common and potentially serious 
symptoms. Patterns of relationships were uncovered that may not be discerned 
by other more conventional analytic methods.


\\\\\
Living with Alzheimer's Dementia: Management and Treatment of Urinary 
Incontinence

Bette D. Pearson and Ruth E. McShane

Urinary incontinence (UI) is well recognized as one of the most prevalent and 
costly conditions among cognitively impaired nursing home (NH) residents. UI 
is present in about 53% of NH residents, although the prevelence in NHs has 
ranged from as low as 40% to as high as 82%, depending upon the operational 
definition, case mix, and settings where the studies were conducted. The 
increasing number of cognitively impaired NH residents that are affected by 
urinary incontinence (UI) necessitate a more complete scientific understanding 
of this condition. Conclusions that can be drawn from the few prior studies 
have been limited by salient methodological problems, especially small sample 
sizes, short follow-up periods, and failure to provide a complete assessment 
or evaluate the impact of risk factors, physical causes, environmental 
factors, and cognitive abilities.

Designed to address these gaps in our understanding of UI in cognitively 
impaired NH residents, this prospective project will implement UI management 
with cognitively impaired NH residents and NH staff who care for them through 
education, assessment, diagnosis, treatment, and evaluation. The specific aims 
are to: 1) educate cognitively impaired NH residents, their family and 
friends, and staff about UI; 2) encourage reporting of established UI by NH 
residents, families, and staff; and 3) improve detection, assessment, 
diagnosis, management and treatment of UI by nurses and other health care 
providers.

The management protocols will be evaluated on an ongoing basis to assess 
resident comfort using the following outcome criteria: 1) Resident continence 
levels will improve. 2) Resident social behaviors will increase including 
voluntary participation in small group activities. 3) Family satisfaction with 
care will increase as families understand the continence program. 4) Clear 
management protocols will increase quality and efficiency of care. 5) Factors 
contributing to or resulting from UI will be identified. 6) NH staff stress 
will decrease related to caring for cognitively impaired residents with UI.


\\\\\
Measurement of Two Forms of Resourcefulness in Healthy Elders

Jaclene A. Zauszniewski

The challenges and losses that accompany aging may alter task performance and 
self-care ability. However, resourceful elders maintain independence in daily 
tasks despite the presence of adverse situations. Resourcefulness consists of 
self-help strategies for coping with adversity. Yet, when faced by challenges 
or losses, elders may also seek help from others. This study examined 
self-help and help-seeking strategies in relation to self-assessed health, 
depressive cognitions, adaptive functioning, and life satisfaction among 150 
healthy elders. The results showed that self-help strategies were 
significantly correlated with the absence of depressive cognitions, adaptive 
functioning, and life satisfaction, and help-seeking behaviors were not. 
Neither of them were associated with self-assessed health. Self-help and 
help-seeking behaviors were not associated and of those subjects who scored 
high on self-help, those who were also help-seekers were not significantly 
different from those who were not. The findings suggest that healthy elders 
may benefit from interventions that facilitate self-help more than those that 
teach them to seek outside help. Future research should examine self-help and 
help-seeking strategies in elders whose physical or psychological health is 
compromised.


\\\\\
Measuring Family Satisfaction with Care in Long-Term Care Settings

Meridean L. Maas, D. S. Brenneman, and D. Reed

Family satisfaction with care is one indicator of the quality of care provided 
to persons in nursing homes. For residents too cognitively impaired to 
critique their care themselves, it may serve as proxy for their own evaluation 
of the care, but family members may give mixed and even contradictory 
indications about satisfaction with care. This poster will focus on assessment 
of family satisfaction with care in long-term care settings. It will use data 
from a quasi-experimental, longitudinal study designed to test the effects of 
a specific nursing intervention, the Family Involvement in Care intervention 
on family and staff in long-term care settings. The sample is composed of 90 
family members of nursing home residents with Alzheimer's Disease or Related 
Disorders (ADRD). They are from eight midwestern facilities, representing 
public, private-for-profit, and private nonprofit settings. Satisfaction with 
care is measured through both quantitative and qualitative methods. The Family 
Perceptions of Care Tool (FPCT) is a 51-item questionnaire measuring four 
areas of family member perceptions, including satisfaction with physical care 
for the resident with Alzheimer's Disease and the quality of staff 
relationships with family members. Satisfaction with care is further measured 
in semi-structured, open-ended interviews conducted by research staff with 
each family member three times during a nine-month period. Preliminary results 
after one year of study will be shared in the form of descriptive statistics 
for the FPCT and qualitative analysis of the interviews. Family members 
express high levels of satisfaction for the most part. Complaints exist, but 
they are veiled, qualified, and excused away. The reluctance of family 
member's to express satisfaction directly presents a barrier to measurement. 
The reasons for this barrier and strategies for overcoming it will be 
presented.


\\\\\
Napping and Sleep Quality in Older Adults

Judith A. Floyd

A common sleep-related complaint among older adults is being sleepy in the 
daytime with resultant napping. Hayter (1983) found that napping increased 
with age, did not affect nighttime sleep, and increased the total amount of 
sleep obtained each 24 hours. The primary purpose of this study was 
constructive replication of Hayter's work. Purposive sampling was used to 
select 92 healthy men and women aged 60-89 who were able to report on aspects 
of their nighttime sleep and daytime well-being. Interviews were conducted to 
obtain background information, a sleep history, and perceptions of sleep need. 
Subjects completed the Modified Sleep Chart (MSC) to provide additional data 
on sleep patterns. Test-retest using the MSC was .97. The statistical 
procedures and level of significance, alpha - .05, were the same as those used 
by Hayter. Hayter's claim that napping increases with age was partially 
supported. Most claims about lack of relationships between napping and 
nighttime sleep behaviors were fully supported. Also, Hayter's finding that 
napping increased the total amount of sleep obtained per 24 hours was 
supported. Two important sleep behaviors, sleep latency (t(90)=2.46) ad number 
of nighttime awakenings (t(90)=2.25), were greater for nappers (n=45) than 
non-nappers (n=47). Older adults who wish to nap may be able to do so without 
disturbing many aspects of their nighttime sleep. However, they should be 
informed that research findings about the effects of napping on sleep latency 
and nighttime awakening are inconclusive.


\\\\\
The Nurse's Role in Retirement Home Residents' Leisure

Lois Roelofs

Although a major goal of nursing is health promotion, the domain of leisure is 
often overlooked in health promotion activities. Thus grounded theory method 
was used to explore retirement home residents' perceptions of how nurses could 
influence their free or leisure time. Theoretical sampling included 39 
residents; data collection consisted of participant observation and intensive 
interviewing; and data analysis involved constant comparative method. The 
majority of subjects responded that they were unaware of how nurses could 
influence their free or leisure time. That the nurses were "doing enough 
already" emerged as the core category. This category included the nursing 
strategies of "treating us kindly" and "helping with problems." These findings 
support a need to identify, validate, and teach health promotion nursing 
interventions for leisure related nursing diagnoses, such as NANDA's 
Diversional Activity Deficit. These interventions would enable gerontological 
nurses to plan care that promotes mental, physical, and spiritual health and, 
thereby, influences older persons' quality of life.


\\\\\
Nursing Assistants' Perceptions of Sensory and Functional Limitations in 
Nursing Home Residents After a Simulated Learning Experience

Judith Murphy

The purpose of this study was to describe nursing assistants' perceptions of 
sensory and functional limitations in nursing home residents after a simulated 
learning experience. A convenience sample of seven (n=7) nursing assistants 
representing day (2) and evening (5) shifts was selected from a 188 bed 
midwestern, suburban, skilled, not for profit nursing facility. Subjects 
participated in an hour long learning experience that simulated sensory and 
functional limitations such as: visual and hearing loss, immobility, painful, 
stiff joints, and tasting bland, pureed foods. Semi-structured interviews were 
conducted within three days following the simulated learning experience and 
again within 21 days. Interviews were audio and transcribed for analysis. Data 
were content analyzed and themes derived.

Results included a heightened awareness, and an increased sensitivity to 
sensory and functional limitations of nursing home residents. Subjects 
reported a change in their approach to residents who have functional 
limitations. All subjects recommended that such an exercise be included in the 
orientation or inservice programs for nursing assistants for both 
senstlization and learning. Implications for nursing administration address 
role development for the nursing assistant and orientation/inservice sessions 
which include this type of sensitivity training. Implications for nursing 
practice include issues of nursing assistant/licensed staff communication.


\\\\\
Older Adults: Age Differnces in Exercise and Exercise-Related Variables

Vicki S. Conn and J. Armer

Beneficial effects of exercise for older adults have been well documented. 
Several studies have documented age differences between younger- and older- 
adults for exercise related variables. The purpose of this study was to 
identify age differences in several measures of exercise and important 
exercise-related variables among young-old (65 through 74 years), middle-old 
(75 through 84 years), and old-old (85 years and over) adults. Independently 
living older adults were recruited for the study (N=117). Exercise, exertion, 
and physical activity were measured by the Health Promoting Lifestyle Profile, 
Baecke Index, and Framingham Physical Activity Index. Self-efficacy and 
perceived benefits and barriers were measured by McAuley's self-efficacy scale 
and the Exercise Benefits/Barriers Scale. Exertion scores differed between 
middle- and old-old but not between young- and middle-old subjects. Exercise 
scores differed significanty between each age group. Self-efficacy scores 
differed only between young- and old-old subjects. No age differences in 
perceived barriers were found. Significant differences in several perceived 
benefits subscale scores were documented. These findings imply that 
gerontological nursing exercise research should address the heterogeneity of 
older adults.


\\\\\
Preventing Pressure Ulcers: A Comparison of No Support Surfaces in an At-Risk 
Skilled Nursing Facility Population

Kelly A. Bosak, F. Tennant, S. Vyhlidal, and D. Moxness

The current state of scientific knowledge of devices designed to prevent 
pressure ulcers is based on skin interface pressure rather than incidence of 
pressure ulcers. The purpose of this study was to compare the incidence of 
pressure ulcers in 40, newly admitted, at risk (Braden Scale Score < 18), 
skilled nursing facility residents, randomly assigned to the Iris 3000 
mattress overlay or the Maxifloat mattress replacement. The sample consisted 
of 22 females and 18 males in each group. The mean age of patients on Iris 
3000 was 80 years; Maxifloat mattress 74 years. Head to toe skin assessments 
were done every other day for 21 days using the Bergstrom Skin Assessment 
tool. Twelve patients on the Iris versus 5 patients on the Maxifloat developed 
pressure ulcers (X2 5.01, p=.o25). Body Mass Index (BMI) (wt/ht X ht/1000) 
differed significantly between groups (F 1.54, p=.01) with Maxifloat group 
mean being greater than Iris group mean. Maxifloat mattresses cost $220 and 
have a life of 5 years; Iris 3000 overlays are single use products costing the 
institution $38 each. Five year institutional use of Maxifloat mattresses can 
save >$50,000 over single-use foam. In conclusion, fewer subjects on Maxifloat 
had pressure ulcers despite having a greater BMI than those on Iris. The 
Maxifloat also proved to be more cost effective.


\\\\\
Religiosity in Elderly Coping with Cancer

Chris Shaw, R. Fehring, and J. Miller

The purpose of this research was to determine the relationships among 
religiosity, spiritual well-being, hope, depression and other mood states in 
elderly persons coping with cancer. One hundred elderly persons (33 males and 
67 females) who had a diagnosis of cancer were purposely selected from the 
in-patient units of two large private hospitals. Using a religiosity index, a 
spiritual well-being scale (SWB), a geriatric depression scale (GDS) the 
Miller hope scale (MHS), and the profile of mood state scale (POMS) a 
consistent positive correlation between SWB and hope (r=0.75, p>0.01) and 
other positive mood states and a consistent significant positive correlation 
between intrinsic religiosity and hope (r=-0.57, p>0.01) and other positive 
mood states was found. Likewise, there was a consistent negative correlation 
between SWB and depression (r=-0.52, p>0.01) and other negative,mood states 
and between intrinsic religiosity and depression (r=-0.44, p>0.01) and other 
negative mood states. Analysis (ANOVA) also indicated significantly higher 
levels of hope and positive moods in those elderly with higher levels of SWB 
and intrinsic religiosity.


\\\\\
The Challenge of Incontinence Records in Iinstitutionalized Elders

Mariah Snyder, Nora Hagans, Judith Hanscom, Heeyoung Lee, Wen-Ching Liao, and 
Valinda Pearson

Over 50% of institutionalized elders have urinary incontinence (AHCPR 
Guidelines, 1992). A key component in planning treatment regimens is 
determining the type, patterns, and extent of incontinence. Twenty-four hour 
records are frequently used to obtain these data. As part of a larger study, 
data are being collected for three days at three points in time post-admission 
on 105 new nursing home admissions. This paper will examine correlations among 
the data obtained on three successive days, patterns that emerge over time, 
and difficulties encountered in obtaining accurate records. Correlations 
between the 24-hour recordings and incontinence noted on the Minimum Data Set 
(MDS) will be done. Recommendations about the number of days required to 
obtain valid and reliable data and strategies that promote accuracy will be 
made.


\\\\\
Validation of Caltrac and Tritrac-R3D Accelerometers to Estimate Energy 
Expenditure in Elderly Subjects with Osteoarthritis (OA) of the Knee

Judith C. Bautch

Estimation of routine physical activity levels is an integral component of 
outcome measurement for special treatment programs as well as in determining 
functional ability of elderly people with OA of the knee. The purpose of the 
study was to measure the validity of the Caltrac and Tritrac-R3D 
(Hemokinetics, Inc., Madison, WI) in this population during treadmill walking.

Two groups of subjects were recruited; those with an abnormal gait and who 
used a cane (n=11) and those with an normal gait without a cane (n=16). All 
subjects met ACR clinical and radiologic criteria for knee OA, had a knee 
extension deficit of > 10 degrees and were > 60 years of age. Oxygen 
consumption, measured simultaneously using indirect calrimetry, was used as 
the reference criterion while subjects walked on a treadmill for three 10 
minute periods at a) self selected speed, 0 grade, b) a 25% increase in speed 
at 0 grade and c) self selected speed at 2% grade. Caltracs were attached over 
both hips and the Tritrac was secured at the waist.

The two groups did not differ in oxygen consumption for any of the walking 
periods. Correlations of estimated energy consumption with either instrument 
were low and not significant. Underestimation of energy cost by the Caltrac 
was 30.39+17.73 and with the Tritrac 23.18+17.59 (mean + SD).

These data suggest that the Caltrac and Tritrac are not appropriate for 
estimation of energy expenditure for individuals functioning within a narrow 
range of activity levels. This may be a function of gait changes with age and 
the heterogeneity of style of muscle use in individuals with an abnormal gait. 
Efforts to develop methods to estimate energy use in this population need to 
continue.


\\\\\
Functional Status Changes Over One Year in Individuals After Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft Surgery

Janet L. Nieveen, L. Zimmerman, and S. Barnason

The purpose of this study was to investigate changes in postoperative 
fuctional status over a one-year time period in individuals undergoing 
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. Data were collected on 37 men and 
12 women who ranged in age from 43-83 years (mean 65.5 years of age). Subjects 
completed the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form 36-item fuctional status 
questionnaire (SF-36) preoperatively, and postoperatively at 3, 6, and 12 
month follow-ups. This instrument yields a physical health summary score and a 
mental health summary score. Using repeated measures ANOVAs, results revealed 
a significant improvement in physical health scores from preop. to 3 months 
(F=38.98, p<.0001), and from 3 months to 6 months (F=30.45, p<.0001). A 
minimal, nonsignificant improvement occurred from 6 months to 12 months. 
Mental health scores followed the same pattern with significant improvements 
found from preop. to 3 months (F=14.97, p<.001), and from 3 months to 6 months 
(F=29.55, p<.0001). Age exhibited no influence on physical or mental fuctional 
status scores. Males had overall better (although only close to significant) 
physical health scores, while mental health scores were similar between the 
sexes. Length of hospitalization stay after the CABG surgery had a significant 
influence on follow-up physical health fuctional status scores even at the 12 
month follow-up. Individuals staying in the hospital 5 days or less had better 
physical health scores. There was no difference on mental health scores. 
Findings of the study support the need for longer follow-up studies on this 
population, and identify factors contributing to changes in fuctional status 
over time.


\\\\\
Using the Braden Scale to Predict Pressure-Ulcer Risk in a Critically-Ill 
Population

Elizabeth Carlson and Mildred G. Kemp

Critically-ill patients are exposed to many factors that place them at risk 
for developing pressure ulcers (PU). Study aims: 1) identify how often the 
Braden Scale should be used to assess PU risk and 2) determine the relative 
contributions of the Braden subscales to predicting pressure ulcers. This 
predictive study of 120 critically-ill patients is being conducted in 3 
Intensive Care Units (ICUs) at a Midwestern medical center. Every 12 hrs for 
the first 48 hrs post-ICU admission, each subject is rated on the Braden Scale 
and a battery of clinical data are gathered. Then these same data elements are 
collected daily for 3 days, and every Monday, Wednesday, Friday thereafter for 
1 month or transfer out of ICU. At the same time, another RA inspects the skin 
and records the site and stage of any PU. Eligibility criteria: > 20 years; 
English speaking; Medicus Type > 3 and/or intubated; and PU free. To date 111 
subjects have completed the study. Sample: mean age of 57 yrs; mean Braden 
score of 13.8; 55% male; 55% white, 34% black, 6.3% Hispanic; 57% medical, 38% 
surgical and 5% respiratory. Data analysis is progressing and will include 
Kaplan-Meier curves, logrank tests, proportional hazards models, and 
classification methods for identifying patients at high risk.


\\\\\
Ventilated Patients Recalled Responses and Self Esteem Post Extubation

Linda Menzel

Although the majority of research on intubated/ventilated (I/V) patients' 
nonphysiological responses is based on data collected after extubation, 
nothing is known about the accuracy of these responses, that is, whether 
patients are able to identify their responses as they were felt and 
experienced when they were I/V. Likewise, although self esteem is 
theoretically related to interpersonal communication, the concept has not been 
examined in I/V patients who are unable to speak and consequently less able to 
communicate effectively with others. The purpose of this prospective 
comparative study was to compare I/V patients' emotional responses to being 
unable to speak, their difficulty with communication, and their self esteem 
during I/V with their recalled responses and self esteem one week after 
extubation. A convenience sample of 65 alert and oriented I/V patients 
recruited from ICUs of a midwestern university hospital provided data while 
intubated, and 31 of these patients participated one week after extubation. 
Instruments used in this study included the Emotion Scale, Ease of 
Communication Scale, Self Esteem Scale, APACHE II and TISS (Therapeutic 
Intervention Scoring System). Paired T tests revealed no significant 
differences in patients' emotional responses to being unable to speak or their 
perceived difficulty with communication reported during I/V and recalled after 
extubation.  Repeated measures ANCOVA showed that patients' self esteem was 
significantly higher after extubation even when severity of illness was 
controlled (F=4.33, p=.048). These findings indicate that I/V patients who 
have been alert and oriented are able to supply accurate data regarding their 
experience in the early post-extubation period. They also suggest that self 
esteem is vulnerable during the I/V experience, possibly related to patients' 
inability to speak.


\\\\\
Attitudes and Opinions of Mental Illness Among Psychiatric Inpatient Consumers

Jacqueline A. Raybuck, Gina Bufe, and April Lucas

With little available data on attitudes of psychiatric consumers regarding 
mental illness and treatment, past research has reported the impact of three 
key variables: ethnic origin, psychopathology, and socioeconomic status. The 
purpose of this cross-sectional exploratory survey is to evaluate consumers' 
attitudes about mental illness and to explore whether the above-mentioned 
variables influence these attitudes. The Theory of Reasoned Action was 
selected as the theoretical framework. The subjects were 100 adult clients 
admitted to psychiatric divisions of a university affiliated hospital. 
Participants who gave infomred consent met the following inclusion criteria: 
absences of both dementia and psychosis. Several psychometric tools were 
utilized for this research study: The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), 
the Family Assessment Scale, the Folstein Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), the 
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale 
(AIMS), the Global Assessment of Functioning Scale (GAS), and the Azjen and 
Fishbein Social Attitude Scale. Demographic data were collected on the study 
participants as well. Results from multiple regression analyses and T-tests 
support previous research findings. Implications for nursing practice are 
twofold: through the identification of attitudes and opinions about mental 
illness, the Psychiatric-Mental Health nurse can educate the targeted consumer 
about mental health, mental illness, and treatment options. Accordingly, 
adherence to the treatment regimen may be improved and the incidence of 
unwarranted acute exacerbations of mental illness may be minimized.


\\\\\
Caring for the Chronically Mentally Ill Patient in the Community: The 
Experience of Burden

Susan L. Jones

The purpose of this research is to describe the objective and subjective 
caregiver burden and situational contexts associated with caring for a family 
member or friend with chronic mental illness. The study design is a 
longitudinal, quasi-experimental study over three years. Over 150 caregivers 
are studied. These caregivers are asked about their relationship with the 
client, the illness of the client, and situations that are troublesome as well 
as those situations that are rewarding. Results show that the caregiver minds 
very little about the objective care required for the client but is bothered 
about the reaction of the client when the client is not pleased with the 
client-caregiver situation. The mental health system is used only in times of 
crisis. Caregiver burden is the major driving force influencing whether the 
mental health system is used and thus a decrease client hospitalizations. 
Policy implications are outlines considering the arrival of a managed care 
mental health system.


\\\\\
Depression in a Disorder of Excessive Sleepiness

Sharon L. Merritt and P. W. Mercer

Guidelines published in 1993 by the AHCPR cite the diagnosis and treatment of 
depression as an area of major concern in primary care. Persons with a chronic 
sleep disorder of excessive sleepiness, such as narcolepsy, may present with 
symptoms of depression that go unrecognized or be assumed to be part of the 
disorder. Initial findings from a large sample survey undertaken by our center 
using the CES-D indicated that 49% of the narcoleptic respondents reported 
experiencing high depressive symptomatology in contrast to findings of about 
20% in the general population. Additionally, anecdotal information provided by 
members of our support group indicate that depression is a common complaint. 
The purpose of this research was to determine the prevalence of depressive 
symptoms among a selected sample of narcoleptics participating in other 
studies being undertaken in our research laboratory, presumably allowing 
tighter control over instrument administration. Results obtained when the Beck 
Depression Inventory was administered to 27 subjects indicate that 13 (48%) 
reported experiencing mild to severe depressive symptoms when the recommended 
score of 10 or > was used as the cutpoint (mean=10.6, SD=8.9). Even when under 
pharmacologic treatment narcoleptics reach an alertness level of about 70% of 
normals indicating that excessive sleepiness is only partially controlled. 
When depressive symptoms are an added burden, narcoleptics may experience 
increased difficulties in managing the disorder along with increased 
functional disability.


\\\\\
Interpretations of Family Experiences: Implications for Developing Therapeutic 
Interventions for Adult Children of Alcoholics

Sandra H. Tweed

Problem Statement: Recent research indicates, contrary to the popular clinical 
literature, that many adults who grow up in an alcoholic family environment 
(ACOA) show levels of psychological adjustment similar to their peers who did 
not grow up in an alcoholic family. Research nneds to explore what accounts 
for resilience for some ACOA, because such understanding will guide prevention 
and intervention strategies. The purpose of the current study was to employ 
theories of interpretive style to understand what may account for positive 
mental health for ACOA.

Methodology: This study employed an independent groups design that included a 
clinical and nonclinical sample of ACOA (n=214) who completed self-report 
measures of distress, well-being, and interpretive style (ISQ). The ISQ 
included dimensions through which ACOA may interpret their family experiences: 
secretive, predictable, supportive, challenging, worry, blame.

Findings and Implications: Statistical analyses (MANOVA, hierarchical 
regression) indicated that three dimensions of the ISQ accounted for 
resilience for this sample of ACOA. That is, interpretatiions of being less to 
blame for family problems, receiving more emotional/social support, and 
viewing family problems as challenging were influential in explaining more 
positive adjustment, whereas the dimensions of worry, predictability, and 
secretive were not as influential. These findings suggest that developing 
interventions that focus on specific interpretations of family experiences may 
be influential in impacting psychologcial adjustment for ACOA.


\\\\\
Reciprocity Between Individuals with Severe and Persistent Mental Illness and 
Their Family Members

Edna K. Hamera, Ann Kuckelman Cobb, and Jamey L. Burris-Fish

The concept of reciprocity as it relates to individuals with severe and 
persistent mental illness and their families was applied to responses of 
family members from a larger survey of family members' perceptions of services 
at a community support program. A content analysis was performed on responses 
to the question that addressed what kinds of physical or emotional help the 
relative with a severe and persistent mental illness gave to the family 
member. Of the 131 family members, 48 perceived their relative helping them. 
Their responses yielded 81 statements which were coded into 163 units, then 
categorized. Eight categories of reciprocity were identified from the 
responses: instrumental tasks (40%), caring (16%), personal characteristics 
(10%), family solidarity (8%), self- coping (8%), peace of mind (6%), family 
sensitization (2%), and financial (2%). While most of the current literature 
addresses the assistance that families provide to their members with a severe 
and persistent mental illness and the burden they often place on the family, 
the responses obtained in this study bring a new dimension to consider in 
looking at these relationships. Not only reciprocity by physical/instrumental 
means was identified, but also by emotional/expressive means. These results 
suggest the need for a shift in perspective from one of burden to one of 
reciprocity in further investigations of the relationship between the 
chronically mentally ill and their families.


\\\\\
Case Managed Care for Technology-Dependent Infants: A Cost Analysis

Virginia Miller

Case management programs can provide comprehensive services to patients with 
complex needs. The Neonatal Pulmonary Program at Tulane University Medical 
Center is a case management program for infants with chronic pulmonary 
problems throughout Louisiana. A nurse case manager coordinates care with a 
multidisciplinary team and the infant's primary care provider and other 
community resources. This study focused on technology-dependent inf&nts with 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and evaluated the Program costs as well as the 
direct and indirect costs to families in caring for their infants. The study 
population included 89 high risk infants enrolled in the Program during the 
time frame of September 1987 through February 1992. Outpatient, inpatient and 
professional staff costs were derived from hospital and clinic billing 
information; all other costs were learned through family interviews. The cost 
analysis included the following: 1) direct health sector Costs of $1,479,042 
(89) for outpatient visits, rehospitalizations, professional staff; 2) direct 
health sector costs of $32,543 (37) for home health care, equipment, 
medications, special diets; 3) direct non-health sector costs of $30,670 (37) 
for transportation, meals, and lodging during clinic visits and 
rehospitalizations, and housing alterations for equipment needs; 4) indirect 
costs of $26,173 (37) for parents' missed work days, demotions and job changes 
due to their infant's illness. This paper will address the economic analysis, 
the challenges of nursing case management for this population and the health 
policy implications of case managed care for this group of technology-
dependent infants.


\\\\\
Nurse Staffing and Patient Outcomes

Mary A. Blegen, Colleen Goode, and Laura Reed

Hospitals' attempts to enhance operational efficiency with work redesign often 
involve using non-licensed personnel. This has led to concerns about the 
quality of nursing care and subsequent patient outcomes. Research that 
systematically evaluates the effects nurse to patient ratio and skill mix on 
patient outcomes is needed; but, the few studies available are restricted to 
nurse staffing indicators for the hospital as a whole and to patient mortality 
as the outcome.

This study describes the relationships among staffing levels and patient 
outcomes at the level ofthe nursing care unit (N=42). Staffing indicators 
include proportion of FTE staff that are RNs and of hours of care per patient 
day given by RNs. Patient indicators include unit rates of RNs morbidity, 
mortality, and adverse occurrences such as medication errors, falls, 
infections, and complaints. Severity of patient illness across units is 
controlled using an institutionally standardized measure of patient acuity. 
Multivariate analysis are done to determine relationships among indicators of 
nurse staffing, patient outcomes and control variables.


\\\\\
Quality and Cost Outcomes Comparing Physician and Midwifery Practices

Patricia Hinton Walker and Patricia Stone

Purpose. This pilot study compared two different models of prenatal and 
childbirth care in terms of the processes of care, cost and clinical outcomes.

Methodology. A retrospective review of prenatal and hospital records was 
undertaken at two different practices that deliver prenatal care in a single 
community. The models of care area birth center (BC) and a traditional 
practice (TP). Both the BC and TP groups are connected to the same hospital. A 
total of 50 subjects were included in this study. All subjects met the 
inclusion criteria of being birth center eligible at 36 weeks gestation.

Results. Processes of care during the prenatal period: no differences. 
However, there were significant differences in processes of care during labor 
and delivery. The BC group was less likely to receive intravenous fluids 
(F=4.5, p<.05) and length of stay was significantly shorter (F=15.5, p<.05). 
There was no difference in clinical outcomes of care of the mother and irfant. 
The study explores models of comparing costs of care including providers fees, 
costs of interventions, and facility costs which will be presented for future 
research.

Conclusions. This research provides an organizing framework for comparing the 
cost and quality outcomes of primary prevention models of care and use of 
mid-level practitioners (CNM's) in the context of a changing, health care 
environment.


\\\\\
Staff Nurses' Work Empowerment, Perceived Control Over Nursing Practice and 
Decisional Involvement: Testing Kanter's Theory of Structural Power

Heather K. Spence Laschinger and Donna Havens

This study tested Kanter's Structural Theory of Organizational Power by 
examining the relationship between staff nurses' perceptions of work 
empowerment and perceived control over their practice and decisional 
authority. According to Kantar (1977), behaviors and attitudes are shaped in 
response to an individual's position and the situations arising in 
organizations as opposed to personal dispositions or socialization 
experiences. Empowerment is obtained from the ability to access and mobilize 
support, information, resources and opportunities in one's position in the 
organization. The empowered are able to accomplish tasks required to achieve 
organizational goals and have the ability to empower those around them, 
thereby increasing work effectiveness. In a descriptive correlational mail 
survey of 127 randomly selected staff nurses employed in 2 North Carolina 
urban hospitals, participants completed the Conditions of Work Effectiveness 
Questionnaire (CWEQ) (Chandler, 1987), the Control over Nursing Practice Scale 
(CNPS) (Gerber, 1993), and the Distribution of Authority Scale (DAS) (Havens, 
1993). The CWEQ measured empowerment concepts described by Kanter. Alpha 
reliability coefficients ranged from .71 to .91. Nurses in this study saw 
themselves as moderately empowered, to have a moderate degree of control over 
their practice, and some input into organizational decisions. Consistent with 
Kanter's theory, work empowerment scores were significantly related to 
perceived control over nursing practice (r=.61, p=.01) and perceived 
decisional authority (r=.31, p=.01).


\\\\\
Turnover of Hospital Chief Nursing Officers

Thomas Kippenbrock

The purpose of this study was to describe chief nursing officer (CNO) turnover 
using a national sample. This study analyzed reasons for CNO attrition as 
reported by CNOs and the hospital chief executive officer (CEO) using a 
turnover model developed by March and Simon (1958). A descriptive design using 
a survey approach was used with questionnaires mailed to the departed CNO and 
the hospital CEO. Questionnaires were adapted and modified from a tool 
developed by Hart, et al., (1992). Sixty-eight CNO questionnaires were 
returned for a 40% rate. The most frequently reported conditions for leaving 
the CNO position were voluntarily resignation, termination, promotion, 
transfer in the system, and offered a better job. The lack of power to make 
changes (54%) was the most frequently cited reason for leaving followed by 
conflicts with the CEO, inadequate nursing personnel, changing health care 
system environment, and developing an effective management team. CEO's 
responses tended to be different from those of CNOs. Forty-seven CEOs 
responded to the survey for a 28% return rate. CEOs identified insufficient 
management/leadership skills, changing health care environment, difficulty 
developing an effective management team, lack of perceived power to make 
changes, and conflict with CEO. Recommendations include: Education of 
executive nurse managers needs to be examined and revised. The majority of the 
departed CNOs earned only undergraduate nursing degrees and most of those with 
nursing graduate degrees were not in nursing administration. CNOs need to 
attend workshops and conferences on improving management/leadership skills.


\\\\\
The Demographic Context of Lead Exposure Among Children Attending Public Lead 
Screening Clinics

E. J. Porter

Research concerning lead poisoning in children has been focused upon 
predicting elevated blood lead levels (BPb > 10 micro-g/dl) based on 
demographic data. Although lead exposure is a health state preliminary to 
elevated BPb, little attention has been given to its demographic context. The 
purposes of this study were: (a) to describe the nature and prevalence of lead 
exposure among children who attended six public lead screening clinics in two 
Wisconsin counties and (b) to explore its relationship to variables such as 
family income, rural/urban home location, and history of previous lead 
screening.

The convenience sample consisted of the parents of 274 children. Before the 
child's blood test, parents completed the Lead Exposure Questionnaire (LEQ), 
responding to closed questions about lead sources (e.g., chipping paint in the 
child' s older home), ingestion behaviors, and demographic variables. Data 
were analyzed using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Based on the LEQ, 247 
children (90.2%) had been exposed to at least one lead source. There were 
significant differences (p<.05) in prevalence of exposure to specific lead 
sources between rural/urban residents, renters/homeowners, and families with 
incomes above/below 100% poverty. Of the 218 children who had not been 
screened before, 177 (81.1%) should have been screened; they had at least one 
CDC risk factor for elevated BPb. Nurses must engage in creative primary 
prevention efforts and continue to study lead exposure's demographic context.


\\\\\
Development of a Measure of Perceived Stigma in People with HIV Infection

Barbara E. Berger, Felissa L. Cohen, and Carol Estwing Ferrans

Stigmatization is a complex process in which inferences are made about an 
individual based on his/her possession of a discrediting attribute. Human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can evoke a strong stigma response because it is 
communicable and often fatal, and is associated with groups that were already 
devalued in other ways. To date, most work with HIV-related stigma has used a 
qualitative approach to explore this phenomenon. This research developed a 
quantitative instrument measuring stigma as perceived by people with HIV. 
Items to measure perceived stigma related to HIV were written based on a model 
derived from the literature on stigma and psychosocial aspects of HIV 
infection. Items surviving two rounds of content review by experts were 
retained. In addition to the stigma items, data collection included measures 
of self-esteem (Rosenberg), depression (CES-D), and social support/social 
conflict (from the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study) that had been previously 
validated with people with HIV. Questionnaire packets were distributed through 
more than 50 HIV health care sites, service organizations, and support groups 
in eight states. Packets could be completed at home and returned anonymously 
by mail. The final sample consisted of 318 questionnaires returned by people 
with HIV (19% women, 22% African-American, 8% Hispanic). Factor analysis of 
the 51 stigma items yielded four factors: personalized stigma, disclosure 
issues, negative self-image, and perceptions of public attitudes toward people 
with HIV. Correlations with self-esteem, depression, social support, and 
social conflict supported the construct validity of the scales based on these 
factors. Extraction of a single higher order factor provided evidence that the 
instrument measured the general construct of perceived stigma related to HIV.


\\\\\
Health Effect's of Noise Annoyance in Factory Workers

Rosemary Ziemba, Sally L. Lusk, Brenda W. Gillespie, and Claire C. Caruso

While the effect of noise on hearing is well documented, effects on other body 
systems are less clear. Cardiovascular response to noise exposure has been 
frequently studied, typically within a framework of stress physiology, but 
findings are equivocal. One explanation for conflicting results is that the 
subjective perception of noise as stressful has greater influence than actual 
sound levels in producing stress. In this paper, relationships are examined 
among noise annoyance, noise levels, blood pressure (BP), pulse, and health 
symptoms in factory workers (n=398). Pulse and BP were measured during the 
administration of a survey of health history, health behavior, lifestyle, 
stress, and noise annoyance.

Noise annoyance (r=.23, p<.001) but not noise exposure was related to a sum 
score of health complaints as well as to several individual complaints, 
including chest pain, headaches, irreguIar heart rate, dizziness, fatigue, 
infections, and stomach problems (r=.13 to .29). Those reporting greater noise 
annoyance were more likely to use hearing protection (r=.19, p<.01) which in 
turn was related to lower systolic (r=-.12, p<.05) and diastolic BP (r=-.17, 
p<.01). The results of multiple regression analyses investigating the effects 
of demographic and psychosocial variables on BP, pulse, noise annoyance, and 
several specific health complaints will be reported.


\\\\\
Noise Annoyance Among Factory and Construction Workers: Construct Development

Madeleine J. Kerr, Sally L Lusk, and Rosemary Ziemba

Exposure to worksite noise is a source of stress and a cause of hearing loss. 
The extent to which the individual perceives the noise as annoying likely 
affects stress levels and may moderate use of hearing protection devices. In 
this study, perceptions of noise annoyance are described for three samplcs of 
workers; automotive plant workers (n=398), construction workers in three 
trades (n=450) and a national sample of plumbers and pipefitters (n=149). An 
instrument to measure noise annoyance was adapted from questions used in a 
field study by van Dijk, Souman, and deVries (1987).

The proportion of workers who perceived various aspects of noise as annoying 
varied from 24 to 83 percent. Impaired communication was the most prevalent 
noise-related complaint across all samples (71 to 83%). ANOVA was used to 
compare noise annoyance among construction worker subgroups; operating 
engineers reported significantly more noise annoyance and carpenters reported 
the least. Narrative data from workers in the three samples identified 
noise-sensitive activities and work noises that are especially disturbing. 
Further elaboration of the construct of noise annoyance will contribute to 
explanatory models of work stress and hearing protection use.


\\\\\
Survey of Public Health Nurses' (PHNs) Current and Potential Activities with 
Persons with Severe Mental Disabilities (SMD)

Carol W. Kennedy, B. J. Polivka and R. Chaudry

Approximately one third of the clients served by PHNs suffer emotional 
disorders that are unrecognized. Using local systems of care to provide cost 
effective services for this population was the framework for this survey of 
all nursing directors of health departments (HD) and directors of mental 
health agencies (MHA) in Ohio. Using Dillman's Total Design Method, responses 
were obtained from mailed surveys and semi-structured interviews of 135 
(95.5%) directors of nursing (DONs) of HD and 210 (65%) executive directors 
(EDs) of MHA regarding the current and potential roles of PHNs in the care of 
individuals with SMD and the barriers and incentives to enhance the PHNs role 
with this group. Many EDs reported being unaware of PHNs functions, but in all 
categories EDs perceived the current and potential role of PHNs to be greater 
than did DONs. Both groups perceived health education as the largest role and 
perceived counseling and care of psychiatric problems as the smallest current 
and potential roles. DONs noted education, while EDs saw improved care, as the 
greatest incentive to increasing PHNs involvement with the SMD. Both DONs and 
EDs perceived finances as the greatest barrier to role expansion. Results 
reveal the need for improved interdisciplinary awareness and collaboration 
regarding the services offered by public health and mental health agencies. 
With updated education and increased support, PHN can be better utilized to 
provide services to individuals with SMD.


\\\\\
Development and Validation of the Jenkins' Parent Apprehension Scale

Ruth L. Jenkins and V. Champion

Parental anxiety is a problem commonly cited for families in which an infant 
is being monitored for apnea or apparent life-threatening event (ALTE). 
Research to date has been descriptive in nature, and no quantifiable measures 
of anxiety specific to apnea of infancy and home cardiopulmonary monitoring 
are reported in the literature. Using a family resilency model and anxiety 
theory an instrument was developed to quantify the concept of apprehension in 
these parents. The Jenkins' Parent Apprehension Scale (JPAS), a summated 
20-item, Likert scale, was derived from the literature describing anxiety or 
upsets for parents. Content validity was established by six experts in the 
fields of nursing, medicine and psychology having knowledge of apnea, anxiety, 
and worry.

This study assessed the reliability and validity of the JPAS with 107 parents 
from a large midwest clinic. Through internal consistency reliability 
analysis, the coefficient on the remaining 10-Item Scale was 0.80.

Criterion-related validity was obtained with concurrent administration of the 
State/Trait Anxiety Inventory and the Penn State Worry Questionnaire. 
Correlations for the State/Trait Anxiety Inventory were adequate for 
State-State (r=0.41, p<01) and low for the State-trait, (r=0.27, p<.01) and 
adequate for the Penn State (r=.33, p<.05). There is evidence that reliability 
and validity are adequate for clinical use.


\\\\\
Development of an Instrument to Assess Problem Behavior in First Grade 
Students Prenatally Exposed to Cocaine

Chadice Covington, V. Delaney-Black, T. Templin, R. Sokol, J. Ager, and J. 
Knoll

Teachers report that children exposed prenatally to cocaine display unique 
academic, social and conduct problems in the school setting. No measure nor 
data exist that specifically identify these alleged behaviors. Three 
hypotheses were developed to reflect the state of knowledge regarding problem 
behaviors in the classroom setting. First, that the problem behaviors of 
cocaine-exposed children differ completely from archetypic problem behaviors; 
2nd that these behaviors do not differ from general problem behaviors and 
finally that these behaviors overlap archetypic behavior commonly assessed in 
the classroom. To test these hypotheses, 24 elementary school teachers 
participated in a consensus process to identify first grade student behaviors 
considered specific to prenatal cocaine exposure. The mean for teaching first 
grade was 10 years (range 1-20) and 71% held a Master's degree. The Problem 
Behavior Scale (PROBS), a 14-item, visual analogue scale, was developed from 
the consensus behavior classifications generated. Teachers then assessed 
students (N=140) with the PROBS and the Conners' Teacher Rating Scale (CTRS). 
Internal consistency was assessed for the PROBS with inter-item correlations 
(mean=.65; range .35 to .86). The coefficient a for the scale was .96. 
Concurrent validity was established between the PROBS and the CTRS. The total 
scores for the two were highly correlated (r=.86). Factor analysis of the two 
scales yielded two factors: hyperactivity-impulsivity, composed of both CTRS 
and PROBS items, and central processing factor, composed of only PROBS items. 
In summary, teachers reported problem behaviors among students believed to be 
cocaine exposed that reflect conduct as well as central processing. 
Differences exist between the PROBS and the CTRS assessments. The PROBS 
measured additional variance in problem behaviors beyond that assessed by the 
CTRS. These findings suggest support to the hypothesis that cocaine exposed 
students have both archetypical and unique behaviors. On going instrument 
development is addressing predictive validity of the PROBS in identifying 
cocaine exposed children.


\\\\\
Early Family Life and Adult Experiences in the Lives of Women

Claire Burke Draucker

Women who have experienced childhood maltreatment, especially sexual abuse, 
may be at risk for continued interpersonal victimization in adulthood. 
However, little is known about the nature of the relationship between 
childhood maltreatment and later experiences of victimization and few studies 
have investigated factors that might mitigate the impact of negative early 
family life experiences. The purpose of this study is to test a casual model 
based on Taylor's (1983) theory of cognitive adaptation and designed to 
identify relationships among early family life experiences, coping mechanisms, 
and victimization in adulthood.

A community-based sample of 622 women obtained by public announcements 
completed a survey questionnaire designed to measure the following variables: 
a. independent variables: the emotional health of family-of-origin (Family of 
Origin Scale, Hovestadt, 1985), childhood sexual, physical (Physical 
Maltreatment Scale, Briere & Runtz, 1988), and emotional abuse (Psychological 
Maltreatment Scale, Briere & Runtz, 1988); b. mediating variables: cognitive 
coping tasks (Cognitive Adaptation Scale, Draucker, 1989; Self-esteem 
Inventory, Coopersmith, 1975), social support (Personal Resource 
Questionnaire, Brandt & Weinert, 1985); and c. depeedent variable: adult 
interpersonal victimization.

Structural equation modeling indicated that the proposed model was incongruent 
with the data. A revised model was designed and will be presented. Results 
suggest that designs utilizing path modeling are essential to understand the 
complex nature of the relationship between childhood and adult victimization 
and to appreciate the role of intervening factors.


\\\\\
Longitudinal Analyses of Family Adaptation and Child Physiological Status in 
Families of Childien with Juvenile Diabetes

Marilyn McCubbin, Ellen Skatrud, Lori Zinck, Sue Cornwell, and Jean Espenshade
Empirical evidence about how families manage and adapt to the care of a child 
with a chronic illness has been steadily accumulating; however, much of this 
research has been cross sectional. The purpose of this study was to examine 
family adaptation and child physiological outcomes over time in 73 families 
who had a child under the age of 12 who had been diagnosed with juvenile 
diabetes for at least one year. The Resiliency Model of Family Stress, 
Adjustment, and Adaptation (McCubbin & McCubbin, 1993) was the theoretical 
framework for this investigation. Data on all Model variables (family demands, 
illness demands, family type using family hardiness, social support, 
appraisal, parental coping and family problem solving communication and the 
outcome of family adaptation) was obtained via independent self report from 
each parent in two-parent families at two points in time, one year apart. An 
average of three glycosolated hemoglobin readings (AIC) taken at the same time 
as family data collection was used for the child's physiological outcome 
variable. Descriptive data about the caregiving demands (time and difficulty) 
reported by mothers and fathers will be presented. Data analysis using 
repeated measures ANOVA and cluster analysis is in progress.


\\\\\
Psychometric Evaluation of a Measure of Family Care Quality

Naomi E. Ervin and Shu-Pi Chen

The purpose of this project was to evaluate the psychometric properties of an 
instrument developed to measure the quality of care provided by a family (or 
friends) to a patient at home. The community health nurse is in a home for a 
brief part of each day or week. Thus a large part of patient care falls to 
family members or friends. This measure, Family Care Quality (FCQ), was 
designed to measure the quality of that care. The FCQ was developed as eleven 
visual analog scales completed by the home care nurse who provided care to the 
patient. Completed instruments on 36 families were analyzed for the initial 
evaluation. Of the 36 patients, 63% were female. Their ages rnaged from 40 to 
93 years with amean of 78.4. Ten (27.8%) of the patients lived alone, 
seventeen (47.2%) lived with one other person; nine (25%) lived with two or 
more people. The alpha coefficient of the FCQ was .96. After an item analysis, 
five items were deleted from the scale with a resulting alpha of .91. An 
examiniation of the construct validity was conducted through performing a 
bivariate correlation of the FCQ with a measure of family coping which ahs 
been shown to be associated with positive caregiving. A moderate correlation 
coefficient (.68) resulted with a two-tailed test of significance (p=.000). A 
factor analysis of the revised instrument resulted in a one factor solution 
with an eigenvalue of 3.78 and 63.1% of the variance explained by the 
solution. Discussion will be presented about these results and implications 
for continued research.


\\\\\
Documentation of Legal Advance Directives: After the Patient Self-
Determination Act

Kay Weiler and Margaret M. Gurian

This pilot study assessed, "Are decisions made by patients about legal options 
for health care documented on the record?" The study, implemented in five 
hospitals in Iowa, included 318 subjects recruited in primary, secondary and 
tertiary care centers. The project used two data collection instruments: a 
record review form and a telephone interview. The record review was used to 
collect demographic, treatment and other data relevant to the patient's 
ability to comprehend information about legal options. The telephone interview 
instrument included a brief assessment of the patient's understanding of the 
legal advance directive (AD) options available in Iowa. From these 
participants, 265 telephone interviews were matched with record reviews. The 
record review revealed the presence of 23 living wills (LW)s (9%) and 18 
durable powers of attorney for health care (DPAHC) (7%). When the subjects 
were asked during the telephone interview if they had ever signed a legal AD, 
68 (26%) responded that they had signed a LW and 43 (16%) responded that they 
had signed a DPAHC. There was a lack of consistency between the patient's 
stated preferences for having an AD placed in the hospital record and the 
actual presence of an AD in their record. The lack of consistency may have 
been due to: 1) hospital policy for placing the AD in the record assuming the 
patient's implied consent; 2) inadequate patient knowledge regarding 
specifically what an AD represents; 3) lack of nurse's knowledge regarding 
what an AD represents; or 4) patient misconceptions of what constitutes a 
hospital record. The inconsistency between the patient's perceptions of 
whether an AD is in their hospital record and the contents of the record 
indicated the need for further research in this area.


\\\\\
Ethical Decision-Making by Emergency Nurses

Marcia Bosek

Traditional ethical decision-making resources may not be useful in resolving 
ethical situations in the emergency department due to time limitations, lack 
of an established nurse-patient relationship, and incompetent patients. The 
purposes of this study are to a) identify the types of ethical situations 
experienced by emergency nurses, and b) describe and analyze the process used 
by emergency nurses when resolving an ethical situation. A grounded theory 
method was used since the ethical decision-making process used by emergency 
nurses is an unexplored phenomenon. Fourteen subjects were self-selected from 
a population of nurses employed in three midwest emergency departments. Each 
subject participated in a semi-structured, audio taped interview. Actions were 
taken to insure the trustworthiness of the data. Ethical situations 
experienced included: confidentiality, justice, aggressiveness of treatment, 
and informed consent. The Basic Social Psychological Process is autonomy. The 
Basic Social Structural Process is advocacy. A conceptual framework describing 
the nurses perception of the ethical situation will be presented. 
Recommendations for nurses and administrators will be discussed.


\\\\\
Interactive Processes Nurses Use in Ethical Decision-Making in Patient Care

Teresa A. Savage

The literature on ethical decision-making by nurses presents both prescriptive 
and descriptive decision-making models. The processes nurses use to move 
through the step-wise models have not been described. An atheoretical approach 
was taken using naturalistic inquiry methodology to explore the processes 
further. Eighteen nurses working in a midwest, urban academic medical center 
were interviewed. Analysis revealed that the nurses did not use the ethical 
decision-making models. The major themes of the interviews focused on the 
moral agency of nurses and the processes by which nurses accomplish their 
objectives for their patients. Physician-nurse relationships and their 
interactions were critical in the expression of moral agency of the nurses. 
The main finding in the sutdy ws that nurses' moral work is invisible. Their 
clinical decision-making, their negotation with others to meet their patients' 
needs, and their investment in their negotation with others to meet their 
patients' needs, and their investment in their patients' welfare virtually 
goes unrecognized and unacknowledged. Implications for nursing practice, 
education, and research will be presented.


\\\\\
Nursing Informatics: Smoking Cessation and Pregnancy

Virginia Hill Rice, Paulette Hoyer, Farshad Fotouhi, and Melvern Ayers

Although client teaching has been mandated as a standard for professional 
nursing practice, issies surrounding what, when, where, and how clients should 
be taught continue. This nursing informatics' clinical trail uses an 
experimental pretest/posttest repeated-measures design to test the hypothesis 
that pregnant women in their first trimester given a new hypermedia 
interactive smoking cessation intervention program (HI-SCIP) will have: 
greater knowledge of the effects of smoking, higher quit rates, higher health 
status, and few low birthweight infants and premature deliveries compared to 
usual care (UC). Cox's Interaction Model for Client Health Behavior guides the 
study, HI-SCIP was designed to provide information on: health benefits of 
quitting, risks associated with continued smoking, 15 specific steps and 
strategies for quitting, signs and symptoms of cessation, how to avoid 
relapse, and indirect effects of the smoking of others on the expectant 
mother, fetus, and newborn using graphic structures where related nodes of 
information are connected by links. Nodes contain tests, icons, sound, film 
clips, and picutures. Pilot data from 60 subjects will be presented as well as 
a detailed description of the development of the project. Findings are 
expected to have far reaching consequences as other self-help, hypermedia 
informatics are developed to address other health problems and client needs 
for education in the current cost- and time-cutting health care environment.


\\\\\
Treatment Decision Making for an Incapacitated Family Member: The Surrogate's 
Lived Experience

Brenda Recchia Jeffers

The purpose of this qualitative phenomenological study was to explore the 
surrogate's lived experience during treatment decision making. A family member 
or legal guardian is expected to act as the surrogate decision maker for 
treatment decisions for an incapacitated family member. Little is known about 
the surrogate's lived experience during decision making. Past research has 
focused on the ability of teh surrogate to predict a family member's wishes 
regarding medical treatment and the type of decisions surrogate's make. The 
theoretical perspective of this study recognized nursing as a human science 
concerned with transpersonal human care (Watson, 1985). Snowball sampling was 
used to recruit participants, 11 of whom were included in the analysis. 
Additional sources of data were included, e.g. a videa documentary. Four major 
themes were identified that provided a pattern to the surrogate experience: 
Contextualizing; Standing by One's Self; Reviewing and Resolving; Gaining 
Strength and Peace. Knowledge of the surrogate's experience contributes to 
nursing's understanding of supportive caring practices and the meaning 
surrogacy has for family members.


\\\\\
Acutal and Perceived Riska nd Utilization of Preventive Services in Older 
Women

K. L. Fiandt, C. H. Pullen, and S. N. Walker

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (1989) recommends an essential core 
set of clinical preventive services specific to age, gender and risk status of 
individuals. Research indicates that older women, who experience more illness 
and disability than men, may be among the lower users of recommended 
preventive services. Risk status, both acutal and perceived, amy influence 
health-related behavior. Research indicates, however, that an individual's 
perception of risk is often inaccurate and that preventive health behaviors 
are determined more by this inaccurate perception of risk than by actual risk 
status. The purpose of this research was to study the relationship between 
actual and perceived risk to each other and to the utilization of preventive 
health services in a sample of older women. A sample of 102 women aged 65 and 
older from four rural communities participated in a computer-assisted 
telephone interview administered by the Bureau of Socail Research. Questions 
assessed the women's: a) perceived and actual risk for osteoporosis, 
depression, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, and various cancers 
and b) related health counseling and screening they recalled receiving in the 
past year. Correlational and crosstabular data analyses is still in progress. 
Initial findings indicate a weak relationship between actual and perceived 
risk. Analysis of the relationship  of perceived and actual risk to 
utilization of preventive services relevant to each disorder will be completed 
in October. This study provides a methodology for use with larger samples and 
a foundation for the study of interventions focused on the modification of 
risk perception as a basis for improved preventive health behavior in older 
women.


\\\\\
Caregiving: Cognitively Versus Physically Impaired Elders

Elaine T. Miller

Cost containment, early discharge, and expanding numbers of elders have 
triggfered concern for targeting health care interventions that assist 
caregivers of the cognitively and/or hysically imparied elder. Using symbolic 
interactionism and role theory as the theoretical underpinnings, this study 
investigated how the caregiving process, formal and informal service 
utilization, depression, and relationship quality differ for caregivers of 
cognitively versus physically impaired elders at home. A random sample of 28 
caregivers for severely physically impaired elders and 28 caregivers of 
cognitively elders participated. A combined qualitative and quantitative 
approach was employed that consisted of reliable and valid instruments and an 
interview guide that identified changes in the caregiving process across time. 
Data analysis revealed significant differences between the groups and 
relationships between selected variables. Qualitative findings revealed the 
importance of targeting specific nursing interventions for the elder and 
caregiver during critical times in the caregiving process and the need to 
develop more financially feasible resources. Legislative ramifications are 
also addressed.


\\\\\
Dietary Status of Persons with Dementia Living in the Community

Holly S. Spilinek and B. W. McCabe

Mangement of the nutritional health of persons with dementia presents 
challenges to caregivers. It has been well-documented that weight loss is a 
major problem as the dementia progresses. Little is known about factors that 
affect the nutritional status of persons with dementia who reside in the 
community. The purpose of this study was to describe dietary intake and 
factors that affect nutritional status of persons with dementia living in the 
community. A descriptive correlational design was used. Subjects were 30 
persons with dementia. Data collected were anthropometric measurements, 3-day 
dietary intake, and personal characteristicds. Data analyses indicate mean 
body mass index was above expected norms for men (27) and within norms for 
women (23); kilocalorie intake was below gender-specific RDAs; (male, x=2099; 
female, x=1470); statistically significant gender-based differences in 
nutrient intake of Kcal (t=3.36, p<0.004); Protein (t=3.15, p<0.006); 
Carbohydrate (t=2.43, p<0.03); fluid (t=2.23, p<0.03) were found. Fifty 
percent of teh subjects were below the recommended RDA for Vitamin D and 
calcium. The findings of this study indicate that the dietary intake of the 
majority of the subjects appears adequeate to meet known nutrient needs to 
basic physiological functioning. Continued research efforts are necessary to 
determine factors that lead to altered nutritional status of persons with AD 
as the disease progresses.


\\\\\
Family Involvement in Institutional Care: Predictors and Effects

Marie-Luise Friedemann and R. Montgomery

Families continue caring for elders in nursing homes. While found beneficial, 
family involvement is often poorly accepted by institutional staff. This 
interdisciplinary study determined the desired roles of families at the time 
of the elder's admission and the influence of family-focused nursing home 
practices, the elder's condition, and basic family patterns on the actual 
family involvement six months later. The study is based on the findings of 
Montgomery's earlier social nursing home theory about variations in families. 
Nursing homes in southern Michigan (134) were surveyed and categorized along 
family practices. Next, 216 family members were interviewed from 24 randomly 
selected homes. Analysis involved constructing measuring models for key 
concepts and hierarchical regression techniques. Family patterns measured with 
items of the ASF (Friedemann) and FES (Moos) predicted between 19 and 31% of 
the variance of 4 types of desired roles while the desired roles and the 
elder's ADL predicted 11 to 23% of the variance of the actual involvement. 
Nursing home policies and the elder's cognitive status had little influence. 
Families assumed roles in concert with their ususal patterns of functioning 
and the extent of involvement was similar in high and low-quality homes. 
Insitutional staff needs to be trained to respect differences among families 
and understand their need to be in control.


\\\\\
Self and nurse Reported Confusion in Hospitalized Older Adults

Leigh Bertholf and J. Billings

Using a prospective, repeated measures design the purpose of this study was: 
to compare patient completed subjective (self reported) measures and 
standardized objective measures of acute confusion, and to examine the 
relationships among subjective measures, standardized mesures and nurse 
charted data of acute confusion. A sample of 84 hopitalized elderly 
medical/surgical patients (age 66-92) were assessed each AM and PM for 
confusion and depression that developed during hospitalization.

Standardized objective tests were used: 1) to measure confusion - Mini-Mental 
State EExamination (MMSE), and Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire 
(SPMSQ); 2) to measure depression - Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). In 
addition, Visual Analog Scales for confusion (VAS-C) and depression (VAS-D) 
provided subjective measurements. Charts were audited for nurse documentation 
of confusion.

In the first 3 days of hospitalization, descriptive statistics indicate the 
following: 1) based on objective tests, 6.5-17.5% scored as confused; 2) 22-
31% self identified some level of confusion; 3) 26-35% self identified some 
level of depression; 4) nurses identify fewer than 9% as confused; and 5) 88% 
of the rsponses from the subjects testing confused using the MMSE/SPSMQ, also 
indicated some level of self-assessed confusion utilizing the VAS-C. No 
significant correlations were found between MMSE or SPMSQ and VAS-C. High 
correlations existed in the following: 1) VAS-C and VAS-D (r=0.7497, p<.001); 
2) VAS-D and GDS scores (r=0.4396, p<.001); and 3) test/retest of VAS-C 
(r=0.919, p<.001). Data suggest clients can self assess some levels of 
confusion/depression. Nurse assessment of patient confusion could be improved 
by using the VAS-C.


\\\\\
Data Analysis with Partial Matching of Overlapping Samples

Patricia A. Martin and B. Mann

Problem. In longitudinal studies of organizations which use human subjects, 
subjects often turn over from one time period to another. Statistical 
methodology is available to correctly analyze such data if subject 
identifities can be tracked; however, confidentiality considerations can make 
such tracking difficult or impossible.

Sample. Data for the secondary analysis involved survey responses.

Methodology. Standard statistical methods for matched and unmatched data are 
reviewed and an example presented illustrating the gain in power using the 
correct analysis. These statistics are then modified to allow analysis in the 
case where only partial information is available on matches.

Results. Methodology is avialable for making proper adjustments when only 
partial matching is possible.

Implications. The results show the danger of ignoring the need to match 
individual responses for meaningful analysis and should encourage better 
coordination of organizational surveys.


\\\\\
Evolution and Evaluation of the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II

Susan Noble Walker and Diane M. Hill

The Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) was developed to fill the need 
for a reliable and valid measure of health-promoting, as opposed to risk-
reducing, lifestyle behavior (Walker, Sechrist & Pender, 1987). Since its 
introduction, the HPLP has been used in hundred of studies throughout the 
world. Results have confirmed its usefulness with adult populations, but have 
consistently indicated some needs for improvement and further evaluation. To 
insure congruence with teh current state of the science, literature was 
reviewed and experts consulted as a basis for revising existing items and 
generating new items. The revised Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II 
(HPLPII) is a 52-item summated rating scale employing a 4-point response 
formate from 1=never to 4=routinely. It measures six dimensions of health-
promoting lifestyle: spiritual growth (9 items), health responsibility (9 
items), physical activity (8 items ), nutrition (9 items), interpersonal 
relations (9 items) and stress management (8 items). Scores are computed for 
the total scale and for each of the six subscales. Construct validity and 
reliability of the HPLPII was assessed in a sample of 712 adults aged 19 to 
92. Confirmatory factor analysis with LISREL supported six factors consistent 
with the dimensions and the loading of the six factors onto a single second 
order latent factor, health-promoting lifestyle. Cronbach's alpha was 0.941 
for the total scale and ranged from 0.792 to 0.871 for the subscales. 
Criterion-related validty was evidenced by moderate correlation with measures 
of health status and quality of life. This enhanced instrument will further 
enable researchers to investigate patterns and determinants of health-
promoting lifestyle, as well as the effects of interventions to alter 
lifestyle.


\\\\\
Measuring Lumbar Flexion with Surface Inclinometers: Validity and Reliability

Daniel G. Samo, Shu-Pi C. Chen, Arthur R. Crampton, Edwin H. Chen, Karen M. 
Conrad, Linda Schulte, and Joseph Mitton

Three surface methods, Pleurimeter double inclinometer, Carpenter double 
inclinometer, and Sensor single inclinometer, were used to determine the 
magnitude of errors in measuring lumbar flexion. Thirty healthy volunteers 
were examined independently by three health professionals from an occupational 
health clinic. Each volunteer went through three stations to have lumbar 
flexion measurements taken using each method. The sequence was repeated. A 
radiograph was taken during the first sequence.

Results showed that (a) the validity of each method was low based on the 
radiographic measures, (b) intra-examiner reliability determined by 
intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) was below .80 in eight situations 
and only one examiner using Pleurimeter achieved .901, (c) inter-examiner 
reliability determined by ICC was below .80 in all six situations, and (d) 
given a method, the examiner and its interaction terms possessed a large 
amount of variance based on the generalizability analysis. Further study is 
needed to compare surface and bone measurements.


\\\\\
Preliminary Studies to Assess the Reliability and Validity of the Diabetes 
Knowledge Survey for Native Americans (DKSNA)

Sara J. Boskovich

The Diabetes Knowledge Survey for Native Americans (DKSNA) was developed in 
response to a felt clinical need. Although culturally specific diabetes 
education programs have been developed there is a lack of diabetes knowledge 
instruments for Native Americans with Type II diabetes. Most available 
instruments are designed for clients with Type I diabetes, have high 
readability levels, are too long or are culturally inappropriate. Preliminary 
studies on the DKSNA include a pilot on Native Americans with type II 
diabetes, N=30. Of the 14 items representing five domains of diabetes 
knowledge; a) general knowledge, b) nutrition, c) complications, d) symptom 
recognition, and e) exercise, an alpha of 0.66 was obtained. Item difficulty 
ranged from -0.06 to 0.90. The frequency distribution for the total scores on 
the items showed a somewhat skewed pattern to the left indicating a relatively 
easy test. Results of the Flesch Kincaid indicated a fourth grade reading 
level. Minor changes were made in the items. After conducting content validity 
studies on this instrument we will proceed with a multi-site testing at Indian 
Health Service (IHS) sites to evaluate validity.


\\\\\
Use of Confirmatory Factor Analysis to Assess the Construct Validity of the 
Hospital Ethical Climate Survey

Linda L. Olson and Richard T. Campbell

Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) enables researchers to operate from an 
underlying theoretical perspective by proposing and testing hypotheses about 
the underlying factor structure of an instrument. The Hospital Ethical Climate 
Survey (HECS) was based on a concept analysis, literature review, and the 
investigator's experience. Schneider's (1990) concept of types of 
organizational climate, and Brown's (1990) conditions for ethical reflection 
guided the research. The construct validity of this new measure was assessed 
by CFA using LISREL 7 procedures. The CFA models were based on a sample of 360 
Registered Nurses who completed a survey consisting of the HECS, the Integrity 
Audit, and a social desirability scale. The final CFA model consists of 26 
variables in 5 factors. The Adjusted Goodness-of-Fit Index was .95, indicating 
a goodfit of the model to the data. The subscales reflect nurses' perceptions 
of peers, patients, managers, hospital, and physicians. A measure of ethical 
climate can enable researchers to study the influence of the workplace on 
nurses' ethical practice.


\\\\\
Grief as a Basic Conditioning Factor Affecting the Self-Care Agency and Self-
Care of Family Caregivers of Persons with Traumatic Brain Injury

Karen L. Goshorn Brown

Persons experiencing traumatic brain injury (TBI) may survive but be forever 
changed physically, cognitively, and/or behaviorally by the event. A sense of 
loss of the person known previously has been described by family caregivers 
(CGs). Grief is known to affect the morbidity and mortality of the bereaved. 
Thus family CGs may be at increased risk for illness and death. The purposes 
of this study are to test hypotheses derived from Orem's (1995) theoretical 
model relative to grief as a basic conditioning factor in TBI family CGs and 
to examine the effects of grief on the CGs' self-care agency and self-care.
The study uses a descriptive comparative cross-sectional design, with family 
CGs of persons with TBI compared to CGs of persons with spinal cord injury and 
paraplegia. Research instruments include the Functional Independence Measure, 
the Texas Revised Inventory of Grief, the Exercise of Self-Care Agency Scale, 
the Appraisal of Self-Care Agency Scale, the Denyes Health Status Instrument, 
the Mental Health Inventory, and the Life 3 global measure of well-being. 
Health and well-being are measured as outcomes of self-care. Data analysis 
includes Pearson product-moment correlations, multiple regression, and ANOVA.

Results of this study should further explicate Orem's model. In addition it 
will alert nurses to the presence of self-care deficits in family CGs who 
cannot give optimum dependent-care while they themselves are in need.


\\\\\
Living with Rheumatic Disease: Physiological Indicators Do Not Predict Quality 
of Life

Janet E. Jeffrey

Although physiological indicators are often used to determine disease 
severity, they do not account for how well adults "live with" rheumatic 
disease. One purpose of this study was to determine how cognitive factors 
mediate the relationship between disease severity and living with the disease. 
Over 120 adults with either rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or fibromyalgia (FS) 
completed a 2-phase study that included physical examination (measure of 
objective disease severity) and questionnaires (measure of subjective impact 
of symptoms, quality of life, depression, coping, and cognitive distortion). 
Characteristics were similar for both groups except RAs were older and had 
been diagnosed Ionger than FSs. At both data collections, subjects with FS 
reported greater severity and impact of symptoms measured on single item and 
multidimensional measures (p<.01). Subjects with FS were more depressed than 
RAs (p<.01), and had poorer quality of life in general and for domains of the 
Quality of Life Index - health/function, socioeconomic, psychological, and 
family (p<.01). A greater proportion (30%) of FSs reported their disease was 
worse at Phase 2 than Phase 1 vs RAs (19%), while 8% FS and 16% RA reported 
being better. Subjects who rated their disease as worse reported significantly 
greater severity and impact from symptoms, more depressive symptoms, and 
poorer quality of life than those who rated disease as better or unchanged 
(p<.01). Given there was no relationship between objective measures of disease 
activity and depression/quality of life, the structural model tested (using 
liseral and path analysis), examined cognitive factors as mediators between 
self-report (subjective) symptoms and depression/quality of life. This model 
held for RAs but not for the FSs. Although perceived impact of disease and 
change in disease status were strong predictors of quality of life, 
measurement of cognitive factors proved problematic and need study.


\\\\\
Meta-Interpretation of Courage Among Individuals with Long-Term Health 
Concerns

A meta-interpretation is a study in which findings from multiple qualitative 
research projects are synthesized. Synthesis of qualitative findings is 
important in order to talk to colleagues, policy makers, and concerned 
citizens about health care issues. Meta-interpretation is also valuable in the 
application of qualitative research results and theory development. The 
purpose of this project was to synthesize findings from three qualitative 
studies of courage among individuals with long-term health concerns. Synthesis 
involved analyzing each study indepndently, determining the type of 
relationship that existed among the studies, translating them into one 
another, and synthesizing the translations into a conceptual model using the 
constant comparative method. Results indicate that courage is learned over 
time and continues to develop while managing life with long-term health 
concerns. This process is characterized by ongoing struggles and involves 
accepting reality, employing problem solving skills, and pushing oneself to 
live life to its fullest in spite of difficulties. The results are vitality 
and a rest for living that exceed the sense that one has merely coped. 
Intrapersonal and interpersonal factors, including health care providers, play 
a role in promoting and maintaining courage.


\\\\\
Social Support: A Study of Gender Differnces in Multiple Sclerosis Spousal 
Caregivers

Doreen M. Good

The purpose of this study was to determine: a) how male and female multiple 
sclerosis (MS) spousal caregivers describe social networks, satisfaction with 
social support (SS), and perceived social support (PSS), and whether there are 
gender differences in these variables; b) the relationship between PSS of 
caregivers and the functional disability of the person with MS; and c) how PSS 
of MS caregivers relates to age of the caregiver, length of caregiving 
service, and quality of the relationship between caregiver and care recipient 
while controlling for the functional disability of the person with MS. The 
work of Lazarus and Folkman provided the conceptual framework for the study. 
Data were collected from a convenience sample of 28 female and 37 male MS 
spousal caregivers using Brandt and Weinert's Personal Resource Questionnaire 
and Gulick's ADL and Symptom Self Assessment. Questionnaires were distributed 
at meetings such as MS support groups. It was found that female caregivers 
scored significantly higher than males on the total number of resources 
available, PSS, and the perceived availability of friends and selfhelp groups. 
There was a positive relationship between caregiver PSS and the abilty of the 
mate to perform intimate functions. Caregiver PSS was also found to be 
positively correlated with the caregiver's level of commitment to the spouseal 
relationship. Differences in SS between male and female caregivers can be 
considered as a basis for nursing care related to the MS caregiver.


\\\\\
The Theory of Integration and its Application in Diabetes and Other Chronic 
Illnesses

Cheri A. Hernandez

This theoretical paper will describe the theory of integration and identify 
possibilities for application of this theory in clinical practice and research 
settings. The theory of integration was developed through initial grounded 
theory study and two follow-up investigations in individuals with insulin 
dependent diabetes mellitus. here are three phases of integration: having 
diabetes, the turning point, and the science of one. Individuals in the third 
phase had a metaphoric theme, a metaphor of integration, that demonstrated the 
process of living in which the diabetic self and the personal self have become 
integrated. Subjects exhibited "lifeways", characteristic patterns of thought 
or action used without conscious knowledge, that facilitated the diabetes 
integration process. Current and proposed uses of this theory in chronic 
illness research will be described, including intervention studies. Potential 
applications in client-nurse relationships and diabetes education program 
format and materials will also be identified.


\\\\\
An Ethnographic Study of the Family Health of Rural Appalachian Microsystems

Sharon A. Denham

As health care reform continues, the need to develop innovative care systems 
that are cost effective, competent, and coordinated for individuals and their 
families is a primary concern. Because health is a socially constructed 
phenomenon within the family unit, an understanding of the multiple family 
health determinants is critical. Although reference to family health is widely 
noted in the literature, clarity of the variables characterizing this concept 
are lacking. The purpose of this ethnography was to explore how families 
define and practice health. An ecological model serves as the conceptual 
foundation for describing the multiple embedded health determinants that 
comprise the definition and practice of family health. The subjects for the 
study were families with preschool children and community informants whose 
Appalachian heritage is strongly linked to a rural Southeastern Ohio county. 
The methods of participant observation, field notes, and taped interviews were 
used to gather the data. A complex system of coding was used to interpret the 
data and meet the study aims using multiple case study analysis. Findings from 
this study reflect sociodemographic variables, routine family behaviors, 
health knowledge, health beliefs, health practices, and ecological influences 
that affect the definition of family health. These findings warrant future 
research and provide a basis for studying the affect of mutiple health 
determinants on the family.


\\\\\
Family Acceptance of a Mental Illness Diagnosis: Japan and Midwestern US

Mineko Yamashita and Diane McNally Forsyth

The purpose of a secondary data analysis from two separate qualitative 
studies, one in Japan and the other in the midwestern U.S., was to explore the 
acceptance of a diagnosis of mental illness in an adult family member for 
family caregivers (total N=30). Despite differences in culture and theoretical 
approaches, the results of these studies were remarkably similar in terms of 
seeking information, concern about what others think, maintaining normalcy, 
and concern for the patient's management of care. One salient difference 
between the two samples was how families learned about the diagnosis. Nursing 
implications include how families' psychoeducation needs are met, especially 
during the initial stage of mental illness diagnosis.


\\\\\
The Influence of Health Potential on Health Work: A Comparative Study of 
Single-Parent and Two-Parent Families

Marilyn Ford-Gilboe

Studies examining family health promotion processes are alinost non-existent, 
particularly in terms of single-parent families. This study tested a 
proposition deduced from Allen's Developmental Health Model (DHM) that the 
health potential of a family (its strengths, motivation and resources) is 
positively related to degree of health work (health-related problem-solving 
and goal attainment) in a Canadian, sample of 138 single-parent (SPFs) and 
No-parent families (TPFs). The mother and one child (age 10-14) each completed 
mailed self-report instruments used to assess family cohesion (FACES III), 
family pride (Family Strengths Scale), mother's non-traditional sex role 
orientation (FEM Scale), self-efficacy (General Self-Efficacy Scale), internal 
health locus of control (IHLCS), network support (PRQ-85), community support 
(Family Social Support Index) and family income. The dependent variable, 
choice of health options (CHO), was measured by the Health Options Scale 
(HOS). In multiple regression analyses using family scores, the independent 
variables predicted 22-27% of the variance in CHO for the total sample for 
each family type. Backward elimination of variables resulted in three 
different two-variable solutions. Family cohesion was a consistent predictor 
of CHO for the total sample (13%), SPFs (8%) and TPFs (9%). Mothers' SRO 
explained an additional 6% of the variance for the total sample, while general 
self-efficacy and community support accounted for another 8% and 10% of the 
variance for SPFs and TPFs, respectively. Similarities found between SPFs and 
TPFs challenge existing problem-oriented views of SPFs by focusing on their 
potential for engaging in health promotion behavior.


\\\\\
Child Pain: Interventions Idnetified by Children in Pain, Their Mothers and 
Their Nurses

Sheila Taylor Myers and Margo McRobert

Assuming children experience pain they describe and know what changes that 
pain, the purpose of this research, part of a larger descriptive study, was 1) 
to develop an inventory of interventions used by children, their mothers, and 
their nurses and/or physicians and 2) contrast those interventions according 
to age and pain intensity. Using a convenience sample (n=255) of 75 sets of 
matched subjects (hospitalized child 3-18, the mother, and the 
nurse/physician), simultaneous but independent pain intensity ratings 
(Wong-Baker Faces Scale) were collected from each set member. In face-to-face 
interviews conducted by clinical nurse specialists or pediatric nurse 
educators, set members were asked what could be done to make the pain better. 
Using content analysis, inventories of pain interventions were developed for 
each set member and tested for correlations with age group and pain intensity 
using Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Clinical implications include 
interventions to manage child pain.


\\\\\
Evaluation of Pain Assessment in the Elderly Orthopedic Patient

Cynthis Phelan and Ann Patek

This study examined pain assessment in the cognitively intact, elderly 
patient. It explored three specific areas: 1) the role of the elderly person 
in assessing pain; 2) the effectiveness of two different pain scales for 
assessing pain in the elderly; and 3) the impact of pre-operative teaching on 
the patient's participation in pain assessment. 169 patients, 60 and older, 
scheduled for total knee or hip replacement at a 520 bed, mid-west tertiary 
hospital were randomly assigned to one of four treatment groups. All groups 
received routine pre-operative teaching and were assigned to use either the 
Present Pain Intensity scale or the Verbal Analog Scale to measure their pain. 
Two of the study groups received additional pre-operative teaching specific to 
pain assessment. The patient completed a mini-mental status exam prior to 
surgery and 12-24 hours post-operatively. Patients also complete a brief 
questionnaire about pain and the pain assessment scale, 12-24 hours, four days 
and ten days post-operatively. Nursing staff recorded the patient's pain 
rating every four hours and were asked their perception of the patient's pain 
and the patient's ability to understand and use the pain scale. The patient's 
pain was managed as per physician routine. The results of this study indicated 
that the pain scales were equally effective in describing post-operative pain 
in this elderly population. In addition, preoperative instruction on pain 
assessment had no significant impact on patient's participation in pain 
management or level of comfort post-operatively.


\\\\\
Imagery and Hypnosis to Reduce Pain and Anxiety Associated with Pediatric 
Surgery

Sally A. Lembert

Self-hypnosis, relaxation, and guided imagery have been shown to be beneficial 
in improving the postoperative course of adult surgical patients. Children and 
adolescents have successfully used guided imagery to significantly reduce the 
pain associated with invasive medical procedures. This presentation will 
explore the use of guided imagery and hypnosis as nursing interventions and 
synthesize research in the last decade as it relates to the pediatric patient 
with pain. The results of the author's investigation of the affects of guided 
imagery on the postoperatlve course of 52 children will be reviewed. This 
study demonstrated that the 26 children who learned imagery had significantly 
less pain postoperatively. Future research directions to examine guided 
imagery and hypnosis as nursing interventions will be identified.

\\\\\
An Invesigation of Non-Noxious Cold as a Pain Intervention Among Women

Barbara D. Manz and Juanita F. Keck

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of peripheral 
stimulation, specifically a non-noxious cold thermal intervention, in the 
reduction of experimental pain. Rationale for the use of peripheral 
stimulation techniques in the reduction of pain comes from the neurophysiology 
of the spinal cord which supports that the firing of non-noxious sensory 
afferents produces active inhibition of neurons transmitting nociceptive 
information through the release of the neurotransmitter enkepbalin. No studies 
have been found that adequately test the effects of a changing cold thermal 
intervention. Because the intervention had not been sufficiently tested to 
allow its use with a clinical population, the study was conducted with 
experimental pain in a non-clinical population. Experimental pain was induced 
through the use of the Submaximal Effort Tourniquet Technique (SETT). A 
convenience samiple of 30 female registered nurses was obtained. Subjects 
served as their own control in a repeated trials design. To control for order 
of presentation, subjects were randomly assigned to the order of the 
intervention. Pain inhibition was measured by a subjective pain numeric rating 
scale and by tolerance time. Meaning of the pain experience was controlled by 
using an experimental pain technique. Past experience with pain and cognitive 
strategy use were measured to assess their potential as confounding variables, 
but were found not significant. Subjects reported a significantly lower pain 
rating for the experimental condition (t=3.44, p=.002). No significant 
difference in tolerance time was detected. The non-noxious cold thermal 
intervention appers to he successful in decreasing experimental pain.


\\\\\
Correlates of Health Service Utilization in At-Risk Community-Dwelling Older 
Adults

Cheryl Schrader and Paul Shelton

It is well documented that older adults are disproportionately heavy users of 
health services, accounting for just one-eighth of the total population, but 
accounting for more than one third of the total health care expenditures. This 
has stimulated an enormous amount of research on the health and service 
utilization patterns of elderly Americans. The purpose of this presentation is 
to discuss results of a screening tool correlated with utilization of selected 
health services in a sample of community-dwelling older adults. A sample of 
949 patients are participating in a geriatric collaborative team intervention. 
Utilizing a treatment (N=528): comparison (N=421) group methodology regression 
analysis was used to test the effects of the model on hospitalizations, length 
of stay, physician visits, medical specialist visits, emergency room visits, 
home health visits, and total utilization of all services. Using the screening 
tool, adjustments were made for age, gender, living status, medication intake, 
functional status, cognition, co-morbities, the presence of a caregiver, and 
the baseline measure of the variable under analysis. Significant differences 
were found between the treatment and comparison groups. The treatment group 
had a shorter length of stay when hospitalized (p<.05), utilized less 
physician (p<.01), medical specialist (p<.01) and emergency room services 
(p<.01) than the comparison group at 12 months. Statistical trends indicate 
that even though the treatment group was more impaired on functionality and 
health status measures, service utilization has been impacted by the treatment 
intervention. Clinicians are better equipped to target care for patients, 
families, and aggregates when they have pertinent and accessible information 
to help predict need for nursing care. Screening and demand management will 
become increasingly important as health services move to managed and capitated 
systems.


\\\\\
Getting Used To It: Older Persons' Management of Transition From Home to 
Retirement Home

Lois Roelofs and Kathleen Korthuis

Little has been reported on how older persons manage the transition from home 
to retirement home. The purpose of this grounded theory study was to analyze 
this process in older persons' description of the experience of living in a 
retirement home. Data were collected by participant observation activities 
within the home and intensive interviews of 40 theoretically sampled residents 
ranging in age from 66 to 94 years. Length of stay in the home ranged from 4 
months to 14 years. Interview data were analyzed using constant comparative 
method to develop coding categories. "Getting used to it" emerged as the basic 
social process which encompasses the strategies of continuing culture, 
relinquishing control, realizing freedom, reconciling disappointments, 
relinquishing amenities, savoring fellowship, and feeling joy. Results of this 
study provide useful information for nurses to anticipate issues they may 
encounter in providing holistic care to older persons who live in retirement 
homes.


\\\\\
Hospital Readmissions During Home Care

Mary Ann Anderson, Kathleen S. Hanson, and Nancy DeVilder

More patients are receiving professional home care following hospital 
discharge. Home care is considered to be an integral part of patent recovery. 
Skilled nursing care delivered in the patient's home may prevent, forestall or 
limit costly readmissions to an inpatient setting. Home care professionals 
have long questioned whether the unplanned returns of their clients to 
hospitals are preventable. The literature is replete with information 
concerning readmission from the perspective of the hospital and the physician. 
However, clients' unplanned returns to an inpatient setting while receiving 
home care services has not received much attention, particularly those during 
the crucial initial 31 day service period. The purpose of this study was to 
describe clients who had unplanned returns to a hospital during the first 31 
days of home care service delivery. Using the Hospital Readmission Inventory 
(HRI), an audit tool with previously established validity and reliability, 68 
medical records of clients from 8 midwestern home care agencies were reviewed. 
Patients with an unplanned return were primarily elderly, married females with 
cardiovaseular or respiratory diagnoses. Few of these clients were identpdent 
in making health care decisions or in carig for themselves. Clients were 
readmitted to the hospital after approximately two weeks of home care service, 
because new health problems developed or the primary diagnosis got worse. No 
subjects were readmitted due to a fall in the home or as a result of 
medication difficulties. Characterization of home care clients at high risk 
for hospital readmission may assist in the development of nursing 
interventions aimed at minimizing unplanned returns to the acute care setting.


\\\\\
Medication Use in Geropsychiatric Home Care

Sara Horton-Deutsch and C. Farran

Home health care is a type of community-based long term care that manages many 
of the elderly's post-hospital and chronic care needs. The management of 
medication use is a crucial component of home health care services that 
pervents rehospitalization or premature nursing home placement. The purpose of 
this study was to quantify medication use bypsychiatric home-based elderly 
patients. Participants were 65 years of age or older, on Medicare, and had a 
primary diagnosis of depression. One hundred eight charts were reviewed 
retrospectively beginning with those most recently discharged. The majority of 
patients were female 93 (86%). The average age was 78.6 years and the average 
length of stay was 78.5 days. The majority of patients were White 83 (77%), 
followed by Black 22 (20.4%), Hospanic 2 (1.9%), and Asian 1 (.9%). 76% of the 
patients were on antidepressants, 42% were on anti-anxiety agents and 30% were 
on antipsychotic. Few patients had a change in medication dosage (7%) and few 
patients had a change in time frequency (95%). the majority of patients were 
on 2 antidepressant medications (32.4%), followed by 1 (31%), 0 (18%) and 3 
(15.7%). 14 different types of antidepressant medications were prescribed: 40 
tricyclics, 38 SSRI's, and 4 MAOI's. Further prospective research will look at 
psychotropic medications effect on objective clinical outcomes.


\\\\\
The Role of Home Health Care in the Explanation of Strain and Depression in 
Family Caregivers of Older Adults

Karen A. Schwarz

Research about home care nurses as providers of social support to caregivers 
of functionally impaired older adults residing in the community is limited. 
The purpose of the study was to determine if informal and formal social 
support moderated the relationship between strain and depression. The 
buffering effect of older adults living in the community were interviewed in 
their homes soon after receiving hospital services and three months later 
about strain, depression, positive caregiving appraisal, informal social 
support, satisfaction with social support, and coping. Strain, depression, and 
positive caregiving appraisal were not significantly different after three 
months between those with home care and those without home care when 
controlling for pretest measures. Social support did not moderate the 
relationship of strain and depression. Additionally, strain and depression 
were significantly higher for caregivers to persons who were cognitively 
impaired and for female caregivers. Satisfaction with informal social support 
was negatively related to strain and depression. Further study is needed about 
the impact of home health care on caregivers of the older adult and 
enhancement of positive caregiving appraisal.


\\\\\
Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) Risk Factor as an Outcome Measure for the 
Cardiac Surgical Patient

Sue Barnason, L. Zimmerman, and J. Nieveen

Evaluation of patients following significant events such as cardiac surgery 
requires further exploration of the recovery trajectory so that methods which 
will maximize the outcomes of the patient (such as the development of clinical 
practice guidelines) and determine measures of quality in health care will be 
developed. The purpose of this study was to determine the influence of cardiac 
surgery (coronary artery bypass and/or valve surgery) on CAD risk factor 
reduction. Data were collected on 84 cardiac surgical patients whose age 
ranged from 36-83 years with a mean of 66 years. Subjects completed the 
Arizona Heart Test (AHT) prior to discharge, at 3, 6, and 12 months 
postoperatively. The AHT is comprised of 10 items designed to measure a 
persons risk for CAD, the female version has one additional item related to 
hormone status. A repeated measures ANOVA showed significantly lower CAD risk 
factor scores of baseline when compared at 3 months (F=14.22, p<.001), 6 
months (F=8.88, p<.01) and 12 months (F=8.12, p<.01). Significant differences 
were found for gender indicating women had lower CAD risk factor scores at 6 
and 12 months compared to males. Study findings support one measure which can 
be used in a comprehensive repertoire of outcome measure for this population.


\\\\\
Critical Care Nurses Knowledge and Attitudes Toward the Near Death Experience

F. Wimbush, L. Bucher, T. Hardie, and E. Hayes
Many people who survive a near-fatal crisis report some variant of a 
phenomenon known as the near-death experience (NDE). This study examined 
nurses' knowledge about and attitude toward the NDE via a self-administered 
questionnaire which was distributed to 1,000 participants at a national 
critical care nursing conference. Six research questions exploring critical 
care nurses' interest, knowledge, attitudes and interventions related to 
clients reporting an NDE were addressed in this descriptive, correlational 
study. To assess for differences between those familiar and unfamiliar with 
NDE, t-tests, chi-square and Mann-Whitney rank sum tests were used. Findings 
indicated a high level of interest but minimal knowledge about the NDE by the 
providers most likely to care for a survivor of NDE. The majority of the 
respondents reported a belief in the phenomenon and a desire for educational 
programs about NDE. Further work is needed regarding nursing's role in this 
experience as well as developing research based, therapeutic interventions for 
this group of clients.


\\\\\
Factors that Promote and Inhibit Physical Activity in Cardiac Patients

Bernice C. Yates

Efforts to enhance functioning and well-being in patients with coronary heart 
disease (CHD) have been hampered by the lack of knowledge about factors that 
promote and inhibit physical activity and by the lack of reliable and valid 
measures to assess activity levels. The purpose of this study was: to examine 
barriers and promoters of physical activity and to compare relationships 
between physiologic and self-report measurement of physical activity within a 
health promotion framework. Fifty CHD patients and fifty health volunteers 
were included as subjects. Subjects wore an electronic accelerometer (Caltrac) 
for 24 hours to assess physiologic functioning and also completed standardized 
questionnaires about self-reported activity, symptoms, depression, and self-
efficacy. Moderate correlations were found between physiologic and self-report 
measures of activity (r=.51-.59). Daily activity levels were higher if 
subjects had fewere symptoms (r=-.67), les symptoms distress (r=-.66), and 
more self-efficacy or confidence in their abilities to walk (r=.86) and to do 
general activities (r=.46). Greater self-efficacy to walk and to do general 
activities were the only variables that associated with BOTH physiologic and 
self-report assessment of physical activities suggesting that individuals' 
perceptions of their abilities were important correlates of actual physical 
activity. Knowledge of the barriers and factors that promote exercise will 
guide the development of nursing interventions aimed at improving activity 
levels in cardiac patients.


\\\\\
Heart Failure Decompensation: Precipitants and Strategies for Case Management

Susan J. Bennett, S. L. Baker, L. B. Milgrom, and M. L. Pressler

Heart failure (HF) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly 
individuals. The purpose of this retrospective study ws to identify and rank 
order the principal reason(s) for hospitalization of persons with HF. All 1992 
admissions to a tertiary care university medical center coded for HF were 
audit (N=319). The 319 admissions included a total of 250 patients. Validity 
of the HF diagnosis was supported by clinical, radiologic, and/or 
echocardiographic criteria in 186 (74%) of the 250 patients. HF was a primary 
or secondary reason for hospitalization in 159 (85%) of the 186 patients. The 
most significant decompensating factor was excessive sodium retention (pitting 
edema, > 2 kg weight gain) which occurred in 79 (50%) of the 159 patients. 
Two- to 3-times less frequently, myocardial ischemia, dysrhythmia, and 
infaction precipitated admission. The results suggest that a case management 
approach structured to optimize body weight (via patient education, adherence 
to dietary Na restriction, and titration of diuretics) might lessen the need 
for impatient therapy.


\\\\\
The Lay Public's Expectations of the Symptoms of Myocardial Infarction

Julie A. Johnson

During an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) individuals must evaluate their 
symptoms and make decisions about the need to seek treatment. Evidece suggests 
the individuals' prior expectation about the symptoms associated with an AMI 
is associated with the amount of time an individual takes to access the 
emergency medical system, thus influencing the success of available therapies. 
The purpose of this study was to examine the lay public's expectations about 
the location, quality, and intensity of discomfort, and the associated 
symptoms of AMI. A street survey approach was utilized in four Chiago 
neighborhoods. The convenience sample consisted of 197 women and 218 men. 
Subjects were asked to rate how likely they would expect to experience 
particular symptoms during a "heart attack." Chest pain was ranked by 50% of 
teh sample as the most likely sumptom of a heart attack. The other symptoms 
ranked in the top 5 included: palpitations, inability to move, shortness of 
breath, and sweating. Forty-one percent of the subjects ranked the middle of 
the chest as the most likely location for discomfort. Subjects ranked the 
following descriptors of qulaity in the top 5: stabbing, pressure, crushing, 
heaviness, and sharp. Over 88% of subjects expected the intensity to be at 
least a 9 on a scale of 0 to 10. The results of this study indentify accurate 
as well as inaccurate perceptions among the lay public about the symptoms of 
AMI. Subjects are more accurate about the symptoms associated with AMI and 
less accurate about symptoms not associated with AMI.


\\\\\
A Comparison of the Effectivness of Differing Types and Difficulty of Music 
Activities in Programming for Older Adults with Alzheimer's Disease and 
Related Disorder

Elizabeth A. Swanson, Linda Garand, Kate Gfeller, Natalie Hanson, and George 
Woodworth

The purpose of this study was to compare the effectivness of three different 
types of music activities (movement, rhythm, and singing) presented at two 
levels of difficulty (high demand, low demand) for persons in three difficult 
cognitive states (high, medium and low) of Alzheimer's Disease and other 
related disorders (ADRD). Trained observers, using a time sampling tool, 
documented the quality of participation of 51 persons with ADRD during twelve 
weeks of musiv therapy group sessions in five different treatment settings. 
Quality of participation was documented usign the following 5 categories: high 
response, low response, passive involvement, passive disruption, and active 
disruption. The gratest propration of high response participation by all three 
functional groups occurred during monvement-type activities. The most 
passivity occurred during singing activities. Participants were more 
purposefully involved in rhythmic and singing activities when those activities 
were presented at lower levels of demand. Disruptive behaviors occurred less 
than 10% of the time, but was more frequently observed among eprsons in the 
group with the most cognitive dysfunction.

The research study provides support for the Progressively Lowered Stress 
Threshold model since persons with the most cognitive impairment had more 
difficulty with the high demand music activities and were more successful with 
the low demand music activities.


\\\\\
Evaluating Staff Use of Crisis Prevention Intervention Techniques

Jaya Jambunathan and K. Bellaire

Violence in psychiatric hospitals is not uncommon, and psychiatric staff often 
work with patients who are agitated, uncooperative and potentially violent. 
For staff working with psychiatric patients, there is a possibility of being 
assaulted with resultant injuries, or having to intervene in an assault. 
Training clinical staff in the management of violent behavior may have the 
potential to reduce violent behavior by psychiatric patients, as well as staff 
injuries and reducing seclusion and restraints. The present sutdy ws conducted 
to evaluate staff use of crisis prevention intervention (CPI) training program 
techniques in averting crisis episodes, resulting in a reduction of seclusion 
and restraint episodes and staff-patient injuries.

A nonexperimental descriptive research design was used to answer the research 
questions: 1) What are the most frequent patient behavior cues identified and 
staff interventions initiated at the various levels (Anxiety, Defensive, 
Acting Out and Tension Reduction) of a crisis? 2) Is there a difference in 
staff use of interventions among different patient populations? 3) Is there a 
relationship between specific demographic variables such as patient diagnosis, 
hostory of violence, age, sex, type of unit, time of incident and the use of 
CPI techniques? Observational data on N=146 patient incidents were collected 
using a 51-item CPI instrument based on the CPI program techniques. 
Descriptive statistics, such as frequencies and Chi squares, ANOVA and Scheffe 
tests were completed to answer the research questions. Results indicated that 
there was a significant difference (p<.001) at the Defensive level of staff 
use of intervention, and few if any de-escalation techniques from the Anxiety 
(initial level) were used. Debriefing techniques after a crisis episode were 
used minimally. Results also indicated that 84.2% of the incidents observed 
were resolved without the use of restraint or seclusion, and no injuries to 
staff or patients were reported in 93.8% of the incidents. A follow-up 
longitudinal study based on the implication of this study is scheduled.


\\\\\
Implementation of the Nursin Interventions Classification (NIC) in Five 
Clinical Sites

Joan K. Carter

The purpose of this investigation was to study the process of the 
implementation of the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC) in five 
clinical sites. A prospective design was used to (a) determine the strategies 
and methods used to introduce the Classification, (b) idnetify the issues that 
emerged, and (c) provide guidelines that facilitate the smooth implementation 
organizations provided the conceptual framework for the study.

Using a qualitative approach and Ethnograph software, data collection methods 
for this 15 month study included audiotape recording of interviews of 
paticipatns at each site (86 interviews) over three time periods, participant 
observation of user group meetings, and analysis of all transactions of an 
electronic mail listserv for NIC users. The findings show that the 
communication channels and the leadership were key strategies for successful 
implementation. Participants fel that the use of NIC would increase both 
efficiency and effectiveness of care. Nurses' responses became more positive 
with more advanced stages of implementation. Results suggest the Rogers' model 
may need revision in the staging of the innovation process in that the present 
model suffers insufficient precision i its stage definition.


\\\\\
Patients' View of Support While Receiving Radiotherapy Treatments for Cancer

Cora Hinds and Alwyn Moyer

This paper will describe how patients with cancer perceive support during 
radiotherapy treatments. Radiation therapy is one of the most effective 
treatmetn modalities used in the control and palliation of cancer. 
Approximately 40 per cent of all newly diagnosed patients with cancer will 
receive radiation treatment, and another 25 per cent of patients living with 
cnacer will require radiation theapy in future (Ontario Ministry of Health, 
1995). The stress associated with the diagnosis of cancer is further 
compounded by the treatment regime. Support is believed to assist patients 
adjust to these stressful experiences. Tape-recorded interviews approximately 
one hour long, were conducted with 12 patients who were receiving radiotherapy 
treatments for cancer. Patients were asked to describe their experiences of 
support while undergoing radiotherapy. Audiotapes were transcribed following 
the procedures and techniques of grounded theory. A tentative model of giving 
and receiving support emerged from the data. Analysis of interview data 
revealed that support is an interpersonal process embedded in an array of 
social exchanges which patients interpret and accept as support. It is multi-
facted and comes in different forms and from different people. The intent or 
meaning of support lies in how it is perceived by the recipient. Support is 
non-patronizing, non-judgemental and unconditional. These findings furhter our 
understanding of concept support and how patients undergoing radiotherapy 
perceive supportive behaviors. Implications for practice will be discussed.


\\\\\
The Transition to First Position as Nurse Practitioner After Graduation

Norma R. Kelly and Maureen Mathews

The graduate of a Nurse Practitioner (NP) program leaves a comfort zone to 
enter a position where feelings of insecurity and stress are common. Because 
the role continues to evolve and is influenced by many environmental issues, 
the preparation of the NP by the academic institution should be assessed on a 
frequent basis. The purpose of this research was to obtain a better 
understanding of the transitional phase to the first position as nurse 
practitioner after graduation. The perceptions of preparation, expectations, 
gains, losses, and strategies for adjustment were explored. Transition defined 
by Chick and Meleis is a passage from one state to another requiring changes 
in life patterns. During a transition, a feeling of disconnectedness and of 
incongruity between what is occurring and what was expected are common and can 
affect self-concept and role identity. A qualitative approach using focus 
groups was developed. Twenty-one alumni, from one large university, who were 
recent graduates of the NP program participated in one of four focus groups. 
Prolonged engagement, investigator triangulation, peer debriefing, member 
checks, described by Lincoln and Cuba were techniques used to ensure 
credibility. The themes identified were: feelings of isolation; uncertainly 
and difficulty in establishing the NP role; special bonding with clients; 
losses of personal time and privacy with a need for a protective barrier. They 
believed more clinical time; more emphasis on management, including handling 
of conflict; and further instruction on diagnostic tests were needed in 
school. They believed they functioned differently than the physician and found 
it necessary to distance themselves from the role of the nurse, as well as the 
physician. The results have implications on the curriculum of graduate schools 
for NPs.


\\\\\
Comparison of Two Methods of Classifying Adequacy of Prenatal Care

Rachel F. Schiffman and Mildren A. Omar

Low income women are at particular risk for starting prenatal care late and/or 
not continuing with visits. The purpose is to compare a modification of the 
original Kessner Index with the Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization Index 
(Kotelchuck, 1994). The research is grounded in King's theory of nursing where 
the pregnant woman and the health care provider come together for the purpose 
of providing prenatal care. The sample consists of 437 records of women from 
two comprehensive prenatal centers. More than 90% of the women at each site 
were Medicaid recipients. The women were on average 22 years of age; most were 
high school graduates, single and Caucasian. Similarities and differences in 
the classification of adequacy of care with each index will be described using 
cross tabulation and Chi Square. Sociodemographic characteristics and birth 
outcomes for each index will be compared. Correct information about the 
pattern of care, the characteristics and birth outcomes of the women in each 
category may assist health care providers in the planning of appropriate 
strategies for low income women to access and use prenatal care services.


\\\\\
The Effect of Social Support on Family Hardiness in Primigravida African-
American Women

Michelle S. Ganchrow Goldstein and C. Covington

Pregnacy is considered by many to be a time of crisis. This may be especially 
true in low socioeconomic level African-American families that have had to 
adapt to the stresses of pregnacy despite low social support. The purpose of 
this study was to examine the relationship between social support and family 
hardiness in primigravida, low socioeconomic status African-American women, 
with hardiness as the outcome measure. Age and socioeconomic status were 
studied as variables affecting social support and family hardiness. This study 
was part of a larger study whose aim was to examine relationships among 
factors immediate to the parent-infant ecology among first-time 
African-American mothers. The Double ABCX Model of Stress and Adaptation 
(McCubbin ad Patterson, 1983) was used to guide this study. The data from the 
subjects was collected from a demographic instrument, the Social Support 
Index, and the Family Hardiness Index. The number of subjects who were 
involved in this study was N=70. Hierarchical linear regression was used to 
determine whether social support (SS) served as a predictor of family 
hardiness (FH), with socioeconomic statas (SES) ad age used as control 
variables. The results showed that SES, age and SS, entered as a model did not 
predict FH. However, SS directly accounted for 18% of the variace in FH 
indicating a strong relationship between those two variables (p=.0162). 
Further studies are needed with women who are in a higher socioeconomic status 
and/or who are in a wider age range to determine whether changes of these 
factors will affect their influence on social support as a predictor of family 
hardiness.


\\\\\
Nursing Strategies and Maternal/Fetal Outcomes in Prenatal Care

Sheila Taylor Myers and Paulette Burns

The study purpose was to describe relationships between elements of prenatal 
care and maternal/infant outcomes recorded in POPRAS formatted prenatal charts 
in 9 community clinics between 1988 and 1991. Historically, effectiveness of 
prenatal care used number of visits to indicate quality of care that reduced 
negative outcomes for women and infants. Yet which interventions contributed 
to the outcomes was not identified, information essential for service 
planning. Intent of this study was to identify specific care contributing to 
positive outcomes. Using a data base constructed from 3634 prenatal charts 
drawn by stratified random sampling, a subsample of 775 records with complete 
data for 6 client characteristics, 7 teaching/counseling strategies, and 4 
medical tests was created. Findings include disproportionate distribution of 
care and 7 logistic regression outcome models, explaining up to 76% of the 
outcome variability with significant teaching/counseling strategies. Models 
offer implications for planning distribution of care.


\\\\\
Quiet Behavioral State Predicts Successful Nipple Feeding in Preterm Infants

Gail C. McCain

The purpose of this research was to describe predictors of successful nipple 
feeding for preterm infants. Twenty preterm infants (M=34+1.8 weeks gestation; 
1,869+191 grams in weight) were observed during their first four nipple 
feedings. The Anderson Behavioral State Scale was used for observations. All 
feedings were given by the investigator to control for differences among 
multiple nurses' feeding technigues. Infants were fed per hospital policy at 
scheduled three hour intervals. Nine of the 20 infants were able to 
successfully nipple their first four nipple feedings (i.e. ingest the 
prescribed volume). The other 11 infants were unsuccessful in completion of 
the nipple feedings (i.e. They ingested some volume per nipple, and some was 
given per gavage). There were no differences between successful and 
non-successful feeders related to birth weight, post-conceptual age at birth, 
APGAR scores, sex, race, formula versus breast milk, and respiratory disease 
history. The nine successful feeders were more often in quiet awake behaviors 
states during feedings compared to the 11 non-successful feeders (t=2.4, 
p=.014). The unsuccessful feeders spent 59% of their feeding in sleep states 
compared to successful feeders who were in sleep states only 28% of their 
feeding time. Along with other research, these findings suggest that infant 
behavioral state is a predictor of feeding readiness and success.


\\\\\
Relaxation Pattern Manifestations of Lamaze-Trained Pregnant Women Listening 
to Music and Environmental Sound Tapes-Qualitative Results

Nancy Wiand

The purpose of this study was to examine relaxation pattern manfestations in 
Lamaze-trained pregnant women listening to Baroque music, New Age music, and 
an environmental ocean sound tape, Rogers' Science of Unitary Human Beings 
provided the theoretical framework. A questionnaire was used with 36 subjects 
to identify their mental images during listening to the three music/sound 
interventions. Content analysis was performed on questionnaire responses and 
inspection of biofeedback graphs. This process revealed that in response to 
the music/ocean sound tip subjects experienced either (1) relaxing effects, 
(2) stimulating effects, (3) negative effects, and, in some cases, (4) effects 
from previous music training. Some of the most interesting responses included 
one subject who hid been sexually-abused by an uncle near the ocean for four 
years who demonstrated marked tension in response to the ocean sounds and good 
relaxation in response to the music. One subject with seven years of violin 
training had marked tension in response to Pachelbel's Canon in D due to 
thinking about how difficult it would be to perform this piece; she was also 
afraid of water, so demonstrated increased tension in response to the ocean 
sounds, but good relaxation in response to Spectrum Suite. There are a number 
of implications for nurses wanting to use music therapeutically with clients 
including individualizing music for clients after assessing their previous 
experience with music and environmental sounds.


\\\\\
Balance and Muscle Strength as Predictors of Frailty Among Older Adults

Nancy E. Dayhoff, J. Suhrheinrich, Robert Topp, Susan Moore, and J. 
Wigglesworth

Diminshed movement and perceived poor health are indicators of human fraily. 
Little is known about the contributions of impairments of balance and muscle 
strength to fraily among community-residing older adults. The purpose of this 
study was to develop empirically based criteria for classifying older adults 
as frail or nonfrail. Predictor variables suggested by literature included 
sensory organization of balance ankle and knee strength, and age. A step-wise 
discriminant analysis was performed to classify older adults who reported 
problems with performance of functional activities (World of Health 
Organization Assessment of FUnctional Capacity) and diminished perceived 
health, both indicators of frailty. Four conditions of sensory organization of 
balance, as measured by the Smart Balance Master (a computerized measure of 
stability), and isometric strength during dorsiflexion, plantar flexion and 
knee extension, as mesured by Microfet (a hand held manual muscle tester) were 
collected. Subjects were 84 adults living in a rural community, 60 to 88 years 
of age, who had volunteered for an exercise intervention study. Fifteen 
subjects were classified as frail. Contrary to expectations, only1 of the 4 
balance measurement condidtions (F=2.97, p<.04) and only dorisflexion muscle 
strength (F=3.14, p<.05) loaded on the discriminant function; 63.9% of the 
grouped cases (N=56) were correctly classified. The balance measure that 
loaded on teh function suggests the frail older adults make poor use of 
vestibular inputs when vision is absent and somatosensory system is perturbed. 
Poor dorsiflexion strength suggests the frail persons may have difficulty 
elevating the front part of the foot during the swing phase of gait and 
controlling the foot at heel strike. Impairments in these two conditions may 
be amenable to exercise interventions to improve these specific dimensions of 
balance and strength and contribute to decreased frailty. Implications for 
theory and practice will be discussed.


\\\\\
Determinants of Cognitive Function of Elderly Patients Upon Hospitalization

Marquis D. Foreman and C. Bourgiugnon

The spcific aim of this project is to test a longitudinal causal model 
describing the evolutionary processes of acute confusion across the trajectory 
of hospitalization for acute illness in older adults. The analysis discussed 
here is from the first 24-hour period of hospitalization. The sample consists 
of 310 elderly patients admitted for the treatment of various medical, as 
opposed to surgical, health problems. The subjects range in age from 65 to 99 
years, with a mean age of 73.03 years, and are predominately female 67% 
(n=209), and African-American (n=197 or 64%). Multiple measures of cognitive 
function and dysfunction were obtained, including the MMSE, CAC-A, A-test, 
Digit Span, CAM, VAS-C, and GDS. Psychophysiologic determinants of cognitive 
function and dysfunction were obtained daily and categorized within Levine's 
Conservation Model of Nursing: the conservation of energy, and structural, 
personal, and social integrity. Using LISREL, a poor data-model fit was 
obtained when testing the proposed model with five latent variables cognition, 
and energy, and structural, personal, and social integrity. The observed 
variables that should hav eloaded on the latent variable of personal and 
social integrity seemed to fit with the latent variable of cognition. The 
final model had good data-model fit with three latent variables of cognition, 
energy, and structure. The Chi-square = 108.24, df = 87, p =0.061, the GFI = 
0.936, and the AGFI = 0.912. Thus, upon admission to the hospital it would 
seem the energy and structural integrity are the primary determinants of 
cognitive function of elderly patients.


\\\\\
The Effect of Strength or Balance Exercises Upon the Health Care Utilization 
of Older Adults

Robert Topp, Nancy Dayhoff, and Joy Suhrheinrich

The purpose of this study was to track the health care utilization of older 
adults involved in either strength training, balance training, or control 
activities for a four month period of time. One-hundred-and-forty-two 
community dwelling older adults (X age = 73.1 + 6.7 years), who had no 
contraindications to regular exercise were randomized into one of three 
groups. The 55 individuals in the strength training group participated in a 
strength training of all major muscle groups using elastic bands (Topp, et 
al., 1994) three times per week for four months. The 53 individuals in the 
balance training group participated in a balance training program (Dayhoff, 
unpublished; Perkins-Carpenter, 1991) three times per week for four months. 
The remaining 34 individuals were assigned to a control group activity. All 
subjects kept monthly diaries of their health care utilization during the four 
month study. 89% (n=122 patient months) of the control group, 90% (n=191 
patient months) of the balance training group, and 90% (n=198 patient months) 
of the strength training group returned their diaries. The control group 
reported significantly more health care visits (F=4.2, p<.016), then either 
the strength or balance training groups. The control group also reported 
significantly more physician, and nonphysician visits than the balance and 
strength training groups respectively. These findings need to be interpreted 
cautiously, but seem to indicate that exercise may impact the health care 
utilization of older adults.


\\\\\
The Effect of a Therapy Dog on Socialization and Physiological Indicators of 
Stress in Residents on Alzheimer's Disease Special Care Units

Kathryn Batson, B. W. McCabe, and M. N. Baun

This study examined the effect of the presence of a therapy dog on 
socialization and physiological indicators of stress in individuals diagnosed 
with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Increased communication and relaxation in the 
presence of a companion dog have been reported in a variety of subjects. A 
within subjects, repeated measures experimental design was used to measure 
heart rate, blood pressure (Kendall), and skin temperature (YSI Tele-
Thermometer) every 2 minutes during 10-minute sessions with or without a dog 
present. Sessions were videotaped for later coding (Daubenmire et al., 1977). 
Frequency scores for smiles (t=2.33, p<.05), tactile contact (t=4.35, p<.01), 
looks (t=2.78, p<.05), physical warmth (t=4.35, p<.01), and praise (t=2.79, 
p<.01); and duration scores for smiles (t=3.30, p<.01), tactile contact 
(t=2.83, p<.01), looks (t=4.42, p<.01), and leans toward (t=2.08, p<.05) were 
significantly higher when the pet was present, but the physiological 
indicators were not. Findings suggest pets can serve as a useful intervention 
for increasing socialization for persons with AD.


\\\\\
Life as Experienced by Women in Their Sixties: A Phenomenological Study

Carolyn W. DeVore

This descriptive, exploratory study explicates the strengths of women in their 
sixties as 12 women describe their lived experience. The meaning of life as 
experienced by these women was derived through a Husserlian phenomenologic 
research method. Ten patterns of life experience were identified across these 
women's stories of their life-world. These women spoke of (1) maintaining 
connectedness with others, (2) becoming strong through unexpected loss, and 3) 
gaining perspective on life by weaving past, present, and future into meaning. 
They told of (4) realizing that you are what you are because of the journey 
that you have traveled, (5) feeling free to do what they want, and (6) 
adjusting to and putting into perspective the physical changes experienced due 
to aging. Study participants (7) recognized the contrast of enduring qualities 
and changes within themselves. They described (8) wanting to do more than they 
were able to, or had time for. These women were future oriented, (9) 
anticipating possibilities for their own future while (10) experiencing caring 
concern for the future of others. Comparison of phenomenological themes with 
the literature contributes knowledge to dispel stereotypes about aging and 
women by illuminating the strengths and wisdom of women in their sixties. 
Patterns of life experience identifiable across their narrative descriptions 
of life provide foundational information for development of theoretical 
conceptualizations on womens health and well-being during the transitional 
life phase of the sixties.


\\\\\
Cervial Cancer Screening Among Chinese and Non-Asian Women

Jane Z-Y Lu

While Asians are the fastest growing ethnic minorities in the U.S., baseline 
data on health behaviors of this group are lacking. The purpose of this study 
was to identify barriers to Pap smear screening in Chinese compared to 
non-Asian women. The questionnaire, based on the Health Belief Model, includes 
variables of perceived susceptibility, seriousness, barriers, efficacy of 
cervical cancer screening and variables on health care utilization. In 
addition to 150 Chinese respondents, 16 African-Americans and one Hispanic 
were randomly selected from a midwest university. Among 71 (43%) Chinese and 
149 (99.3%) non-Asians who had a Pap smear previously, respectively 53.5% and 
81.2% (p<.001) received physical examinations in the past year, and 67.2% vs. 
92.5% (p<.05) had been advised about Pap smears by a health provider. The 
duration since the last Pap test between Chinese and non-Asians was not 
significantly different. The scores of perceived susceptibility and perceived 
comfort were significantly different between these two groups (p<.005), 
whereas the differences were not significant in the scores of perceived 
seriousness and general efficacy of Pap tests. Logistic Regression showed that 
only perceived comfort significantly accounted for 38.8% of variance on the 
acceptance of a Pap test among Chinese women. Factors that facilitate or 
impede the participation in the Pap smear screening program are culturally 
specific and the understanding of them is essential to deliver culturally 
sensitive care.


\\\\\
Determination of Cultural Equivalence for a Spanish Scale of Learned 
Resourcefulness

Jaclene A. Zauszniewski and Gloria A. Harman

The Hispanic population is increasing rapidly and there is a growing interest 
in promoting their physical and psychological health. Learned resourcefulness 
facilitates the acquisition of health-promoting behaviors and the skills which 
constitute it are measured by Rosenbaum's Self-Control Schedule (SCS). Since 
Spanish is the primary language for many Hispanics, this two-phase study 
examined the cultural equivalence and psychometric properties of a Spanish 
translation of the SCS. Phase one evaluated the content of original and 
back-translated SCS items and some discrepancies that reflected cultural 
differences were found. Phase two was a cross-sectional survey of a 
convenience sample of 30 bilingual persons who completed the SCS in English 
and Spanish. The analysis of English-Spanish item pairs showed similar 
responses for 97% of the item pairs Alpha coefficients for both scales were 
.85. Paired t-tests revealed no significant mean differences for 78% of the 
item pairs. Significant correlations between item pairs were found for 83% of 
the items. No items were consistently problematic which suggests the potential 
usefulness of the Spanish SCS. Further instrument development and psychometric 
study is recommended with larger samples of Hispanics.


\\\\\
Documenting the Contributions of Research to an Indian Community

Sharol Jacobson, Deborah Booton-Hiser, Kay Edwards, and Sue Pryor

A common complaint of Indian communities is that researchers fail to share 
findings with them or contribute in practical ways to the community. 
("Research is all take from us and no give.") This methodological paper will 
describe ways in which we planned in advance to contribute to the community, 
promote positive research-community relations, and forestall this complaint 
during a study of diabetes representations of Muskoke (Mus-ko-kee) Indians. 
The nature/contents and usefulness of participation in community life, use of 
meaningful incentives, diaries of helpful activities by project staff, health 
fairs at two community sites, events, and times, posters for community centers 
that emphasized both findings and benefits, and cost estimates of services 
rendered to the community will be described. Such strategies that are 
culturally congruent with the community can foster enormous good will for 
subsequent studies.

\\\\\
Electronically-Monitored Oral Contraceptive Pill-Taking Among Women in 
Beijing, China

Deborah Oakley, Mei-yu Yu, Wang Shao-xian, Yao Jing-ping, and Yang Hui

Rates of up to 60% for irregular pill-taking among women oral contraceptive 
(OC) pill users have been implicated in unintended pregnancy. In the U.S., 
electronically-augmented pill pack data have been compared with self-report 
daily calendars by Potter and Oakley. The electronic data, which records the 
time and date when pills are removed from the pack, show that women most 
likely to be irregular users are least likely to provide accurate self-report 
data. Therefore, the most accurate way to measure OC use is with 
electronically equipped packaging. In China OC users have especially high 
pregnancy rates. Therefore, a pilot test was undertaken with 5 women in the 
rural Beijing area to determine the feasibility of collecting electronic data 
to study the impact of quality of care, personal characteristics, and the 
policy environment on the quality of OC use. Data from use during October, 
November, and December 1995 will be presented. A case study format will be 
used to present the quantitative electronic and questionnaire data and the 
qualitative data from in-depth interviews. The process of collaboration 
between schools of nursing and public health in two countries will also be 
analyzed.


\\\\\
Health Perceptions and Behaviors Among Two Generations of Southern Black 
Families

J. Armer and T. Tripp-Reimer

The experience of health among vulnerable ethnic minority groups in America 
may differ widely from that of the general population. As part of a research 
project focusing on health and well-being among three generations of 
ethnically-diverse community-dwelling adults, 180 community-dwelling 
African-American respondents in a southern state were invited to define what 
being healthy meant to them and to list activities aimed at promoting and 
protecting their own health. Content analysis of responses to the open-ended 
questions was carried out, with sorting by themes into categories. The unit of 
analysis was the complete thought. The analyses of both the definition of 
health and the self-reported health maintenance behaviors of these respondents 
support the notion of a multidimensional concept of health. Mental, physical, 
psychological, and spiritual components of health and health behaviors were 
cited. Qualitative findings were compared and contrasted to responses to the 
quantitative measure of the Health Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) (Pender, 
1987), where the nutrition subscale raked third highest and the exercise 
subscale ranked lowest of six subscales. Among the Black respondents, the 
self-actualization HPLP subscale score ranked highest, a finding unique to 
this ethnic group. Perceived family social support was reported higher than 
perceived social support from friends. Overall findings were relatively stable 
among respondents above and below age 60. These research findings increase 
understanding of health-promoting and health-maintaining behaviors among 
vulnerable populations. It is important that health professionals recognize 
and respond with culturally-appropriate research-based interventions to the 
unique health-related perspectives and behaviors of ethnically-diverse elders 
and families.


\\\\\
Desaturation Events During Oral Feedings With and Without an NG Tube in VLBW 
Infants

Shyang-Yun Pam K. Shiao, J. Brooker, and T. DiFiore

The purpose of this study is to examine the desaturation events with the 
presenCe and absence    an                 an of   NG tube during   entire 
oral feeding in 20 verylowbirth~weight (VLBW) infants Infants                 
                                                                              
                               $1 were observed on postnatal days 17-82 days 
(49 + 18.91) during oral feedings, once with an NG tube and once without, at 9 
am and 3 pm feedings within one day, decided in random order.      Fifteen 
infants experienced 166 desaturation events (<90%), 83 desaturation events 
Without the NG tube and 83 events with the NG tube present. Infants who 
developed desaturation events had a longer transition period from tube 
feedings to oral feedings (p < .05), and started feedings with lower oxygen 
saturation (p < .05). Nearly all desaturation events (97%) occurred with 
breathing pauses (11.32 + 6.67 seconds), a change in heart rate, and an 
increase in ETCO2. The presence of                         l","' an NG tube 
increased the duration of desaturation by an average of 8 seconds (p <.05). 
Infants'                      ill ",1' l,~,,],,l,,;~,,4, 1,,, oxygen 
satrffation needs to be monitored with breathing and heart rate to prevent 
desaturation with feedings, and feedings may need to be started with a 
baseline lowest saturation of 95% or higher, *      This study is supported in 
part by Individual National Research Service Award Predoctoral         
Fellowship # F31 NR06796, Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing Alurnni 
Research Award,                       `l"'lt;,', 1'             Sigma Theta 
Tau Alpha Mu Chapter Research Award.          PARENTS'               
PARTICIPATING IN RESEARCH INTERVIEWS ABoUT THEIR PERINATAL LOSS               
                ,, !`~`                                                       
                                                                    ,`it Karen 
Kavanauah, University of Illinois at Chicago College of Nursing, Chicago, 
Illinois         DESCRIPTIONS Of  The benefits of participating in research 
interviews have been identif ied in the qualitative research literature, and 
the theraPeutic value of having bereaved families tell the `story" of their 
loss has been described in the family therapy literature. The purpose of this 
study was to describe parents' responses to the experience of participating in 
research interviews during a phenomenological study of perinatal loss. For the 
phenomenological study, five mothers and three fathers who had experienced the 
recent death of a live-born infant weighing less than 500 grans at birth were 
interviewed two or three times. A total of 18 in-depth, open-ended interviews 
were conducted between four and fifteen, weeks after the loss. At the end of 
each interview, each parent was asked, `What was it like for you to 
participate in this interview today?6 The interviews, including this 
concluding question, had been tape-recorded and transcribed verbatim. for this 
study, a content analysis was performed for the concluding question using the 
typed transcripts for all interviews. Parents identified a number of benefits 
of participating in the interviews, including (a)  emotional relief; (b) an 
opportunity to help others, which for some parents gave meaning to their loss; 
(c) a better ~derstanding of their own experience, and (d) validation of their 
feelings. Parents also reported that they shared thoughts and feelings with 
the investigator that they had never shared with anyone else, and that the 
interviews gave parents a unique opportunity to tell their "who!e story". 
These findings suggest that participating in intensive research interviews can 
be therapeutIc for parents who have experienced a perinatal loss.


\\\\\
Thematic Analysis of Children's Responses to Diaster Involving Other Children

Ruth Y. Seideman, Sheila T. Myers, Margo MacRoberts, and Dianne Miller

Responses of children to negative experiences present situations in which 
developmentally appropriate guidance is needed. On April 19, 1995, the 
Oklahoma City federal building was bombed killing 168 adults and children, 
injuring many others. In response, children sent expressions of thoughts and 
feelings to Children's Hospital of Oklahoma trying to communicate with victims 
and caregivers. The purpose of this study was to describe responses of 
children to a widely publicized disaster. Methodology consisted of thematic 
analysis of a sample of 300 communiques selected from 27 boxes containing over 
40,000 communiques from children. Purposeful sampling was conducted using the 
maximum variation sampling strategy. Analysis involved development of major 
themes: showing empathy, offering help, relating to own life, clarifying what 
happened, dwelling on violence, calling on religion, and wanting revenge. 
Content was also coded according to Kolhberg's moral development theory. 
Implications include better understanding of the responses of children to such 
a disaster, as related to psychosocial, cognitive and moral child 
developmental theories, and providing a basis for planning interventions and 
developing materials needed for parents and child care providers after 
disasters occur.


\\\\\
Tricks of the Trade for Managing Childhood Illness: Parents' Reports of Their 
Ad Hoc Management Strategies

Agatha Gallo, K. Knafl, B. Breitmayer, and L. Zoeller

Parents of children with chronic illness are expected to assume an active role 
in managing their child's illness. Much of the research on the role of parents 
in illness management has focused on parents' and children's adherence to the 
treatment regimen. However, illness management typically entails much more 
than treatment adherence as parents devise ways to accommodate family life to 
the demands of illness. The purpose of this paper is to expand our 
understanding of how paints develop and use "tricks of the trade" to manage 
their children's chronic illness by specifying those areas in which parents 
develop ad hoc strategies, describing the nature of such strategies, 
identifying the role of providers in developing ad hoc strategies, and 
exploring differences in ad hoc strategies across varying illness and family 
situations. Data come from interviews with parents in 59 families (58 mothers, 
49 fathers) who responded to open ended questions about the extent to which 
they relied on input from health care professionals or their own 
experientially based knowledge to manage their child's chronic illness. Data 
analysis drew on established qualitative techniques (Miles & Huberman, 1993) 
and revealed considerable variation in the extent to which parents used ad hoc 
management strategies and the contributions of professionals to the 
development of such strategies. Findings are discussed in terms of the need to 
refine further the concept of ad hoc management strategies as an important 
aspect of family response to childhood chronic illness and their implications 
for establishing positive working relationships between parents and health 
care professionals.


\\\\\
Implementation and Testing of a Smoking Cessation Program for Urban Pregnant 
Latinas

Pamela K. Pletsch

Cigarette smoking is an important modifiable risk factor, yet the Healthy 
People 2000 objectives remain unmet for pregnant Latinas. The goals for this 
research were to implement and test "Smoke Free Madres," an 
investigator-designed 3-session smoking cessation intervention based on 
Bandura's Social Cognitive Theory and tailored for pregnant Latinas. Focus 
group discussions with members of the target population preceded 
implementation and allowed for refinement. The first Smoke Free Madres session 
focuses on consciousness-raising, establishing social support, and stress 
management; the second on preparing to quit; and the third on maintenance and 
relapse prevention. A sample of 17 urban pregnant Latina smokers between the 
ages of 14 and 24 participated in the intervention. A quasi-experimental 
pre-test, post-test, with follow-up design was used with the experimental 
group participating in the 3-session Smoke Free Madres program and the 
treatment control group participating in an 8-session standard program. 
Smoking status and self-efficacy for smoking abstinence were measured pre and 
post intervention and at follow-up. At follow-up, 60% of each group had quit 
or significantly reduced the number of cigarettes smoked. Study quit rates 
were high compared to other programs. Smoke Free Madres, the less intensive, 
3-session tailored intervention was as effective as the longer 8-session 
generic smoking cessation program. Results are discussed as they illuminate 
the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of interventions in 
research with vulnerable populations of urban women.

\\\\\
Laying the Empirical Groundwork for Intervention Research with Women who have 
Alcohol Problems and Histories of Childhood Sexual Abuse

Joanne M. Hall

An ethnographic study was undertaken in the Milwaukee, WI area to lay the 
empirical groundwork for intervention research targeted to women who have 
alcohol problems and histories of childhood sexual abuse. The purposes of the 
study were to: (a) explore the health needs of these women and their access to 
resources and services, (b) evaluate existing community resources and services 
for women who are dually affected by alcohol problems and histories of 
childhood sexual abuse, and (c) establish links with members of appropriate 
community-based organizations who can collaborate in designing intervention 
research to improve services for this at-risk group. Data collection involved 
ethnographic interviews with 20 women who have alcohol problems and histories 
of childhood sexual abuse, community assessment of local alcohol and sexual 
abuse-related health and social services, and analysis of policies and 
relevant public records. Recruitment of ethnic/racial minority and low-income 
women were emphasized. These qualitative data were analyzed using ethnographic 
coding, narrative analysis, and matrix analysis. In the process of the 
research, collaborative links with the community were established via 
extensive outreach efforts. The major goal of these activities is the design 
of interventions that have local meaning and utility. Results are discussed as 
they illuminate the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of 
interventions in research with vulnerable populations of urban women.


\\\\\
Process and Outcome Evaluation of Community Invervention Research to Prevent 
HIV Among Women at Risk

Patricia E. Stevens

The authors report on the processes and outcomes of intervention research to 
prevent HIV among women. The project was implemented over two years and took 
place in community settings, utilizing peers to collect ethnographic data, 
disseminate HIV prevention information, provide emotional support, and model 
skills necessary for behavior change. A cadre of peer educators, who were also 
trained as indigenous ethnographic researchers, conducted interviews about HIV 
risk-taking with a racially diverse sample of 1189 women in bars, dance clubs, 
and at community events, offering individually tailored HIV prevention 
education to each participant. They also produced 55 group educational 
presentations designed to raise consciousness about HIV prevention, 
demonstrate safer sex strategies, and role-model risk reduction, with a total 
of 3665 women in attendance. Key process evaluation findings suggest that the 
project's combined individual and group approach and its continuity over time 
were particularly well-matched to the needs of the target population. The 
outcome evaluation indicates that the project positively affected 
participants' intent to change risk behaviors, supported incremental changes 
to reduce risk, assisted participants in the interpersonal realm of partner 
negotiations, and began to change community conventions about sexual 
expectations and practices. Results are discussed as they illuminate the 
design, implementation testing, and evaluation of interventions in research 
with vulnerable populations of urban women.


\\\\\
Tailoring an Effectiveness Trial of a Psychoeducational Intervention for Trhee 
Ethnically Diverse Groups: American Indian, Hispanic, and African American 
Working Women

Linda Napholz

The primary purpose of this study was to determine the effectiveness of a 
six-session group psychoeducational intervention in reducing role conflict and 
depression, and increasing instrumentality, self-esteem, and life satisfaction 
among minority working women: one group American Indian (n=8), one group 
Hispanic (n=9), and two groups African American (n=7, n=9). The design of the 
intervention used traditional coping strategies as well as cognitive 
behavioral methods to enhance psychological well-being through education, 
problem identification, and problem solving. The secondary purposes of the 
study were to: (a) understand the lived experience of role conflict among 
minority working women and (b) refine the psychoeducational intervention in 
preparation for larger scale testing among culturally diverse groups. A 
triangulated method was used, combining both quantitative and qualitative 
methods. The quantitative portion of the study was based on a one-group 
pretest-posttest follow-up design, utilizing well-tested instruments to 
measure study variables. Analysis of qualitative data from the content of 
groups allowed the investigator to describe in depth the phenomena of role 
conflict, instrumentality, and indices of psychological well-being for 
American Indian, Hispanic, and African American working women. The use of 
qualitative methods also proved essential in tailoring the intervention to 
each ethnic group, making it meaningful and culturally relevant. Results are 
discussed as they illuminate the design, implementation, testing, and 
evaluation of interventions in research with vulnerable populations of urban 
women.


\\\\\
Assessment of Critical Thinking Skills and Dispositions of Registered Nurses

Jullette C. Mitre

The National League of Nursing mandated that nursing programs document the 
outcomes of critical thinking in their graduates (NLN, 1991). The purpose of 
this pilot study was to assess and obtain information regarding the 
feasibility of administering the California Critical Thinking Skills Test 
(CCTST), California Critical Thinking Dispositions Inventory (CCTDI), and an 
investigator developed, Supervisor/Self Rating scale and Demographic Data. 
Information Processing Theory with the application of Richard Paul (1993) and 
Peter Facione's (1992) concepts of the cognitive and affective domains of 
critical thinking provide the framework for this study. A volunteer sample of 
eight RNs employed at a rural Midwestern hospital and their supervisors (N=6) 
were the subjects of the study. Descriptive data of the CCTST and CCTDI total 
test score results, each test's subscore results, supervisor and self ratings 
results and demographic data are reported. Preliminary findings indicate that 
testing time and tracking of multiple forms is lengthy and unwieldy. Test 
score results fell into a normal curve (range of 7-28 points). Subjects with 
lower skills scores tended to have higher dispositions scores and vice versa. 
Overall supervisor ratings tended to be slightly higher than the RN self 
evaluation ratings for those RNs with higher skills test scores and vice 
versa. Despite the limitations of the pilot study, data results provide 
information about the critical thinking skills and dispositions of the RN, 
neither of which have been found in the literature. Several avenues for 
further research are implicated by this pilot study.


\\\\\
Midwest Baccalaureate Nursing Educatin Curricular Changes in Response to 
Health Care Reform

Georgia Urban, Terry Wood, Maryellen McSweeney, and Sandy Lindquist

The purpose of this cross-sectional research study was to describe how 
baccalaureate nursing curricula are being designed for preparing graduates to 
function in the changing health care delivery system. The sample was 137 NLN 
accredited generic baccalaureate nursing programs in the midwest region of the 
United States. Data were collected by means of a mailed survey to curriculum 
chairpersons. Eighty-three questionnaires were returned for a response rate of 
60%. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics including percentage 
distributions and measures of central tendency. Data indicated that major 
documents influencing curricular changes were Healthy People 2000 (69.9%) and 
Nursing's Agenda for Health Care Reform (63.9%). Other documents influencing 
change include Healthy America: Practitioners for 2005-PEW Commission (37.3%). 
Results reflected predominant utilization of community based clinical settings 
with the majority of the programs using the following clinical sites: 
community/public health settings (100%), home health agencies (96.4%), 
ambulatory care (92.8%), extended care facilities (90.4%), and school health 
(85.5%). Hospital acute care settings were used by 98% of the programs along 
with hospital rehabilitation care (78.3%) and the hospital emergency room 
(78.3%). In regard to potential for violence in hospital settings and the 
community, 84% reported that they have not altered clinical placement of 
students. Implications of this study include that there is strong movement 
towards utilizing a variety of community based clinical sites. Findings may be 
beneficial to faculty in curricular development and revision.


\\\\\
Nurse Educators' Perception of Critical Thinking

Joanne M. Gordon

Dialog is faciliatated when a common understanding of words exists. This 
descriptive study demonstrated that nurse educators and non-nurse experts 
conceptualize critical thinking differently. A review of the literature points 
out conflicting views among nurse educators regarding their perception of 
critical thinking. Some perceived critical thinking as analogous to the 
nursing process, while others defined critical thinking as an abstract 
thinking process. This study compared and contrasted nurse educators' 
perception of critical thinking with the perception held by 46 critical 
thinking experts from disciplines unrelated to the health sciences. A cluster 
sampling technique was use. An investigator-developed Critical Thinking Survey 
was randomly distributed to 415 faculty in 83 baccalaureate nursing programs 
in the Midwest, with a return rate of 61 percent. This study found that nurse 
educators perceived critical thinking as a rational, linear process congruent 
with the nursing process, decision making, diagnostic reasoning, and the 
research process. Chi-square Goodness of Fit analyses found statistically 
significant differences (p<0.01) between critical thinking experts' and nurse 
educators' perception of critical thinking, in other disciplines, it is 
evident that nurse educators' view of critical thinking is not congruent with 
the view of non-nurse experts. This study suggests that practice disciplines 
such as nursing may perceive critical thinking differently than non-practice 
disciplines.


\\\\\
Predicting Success on NCLEX-RN: Use of Comprehensive Examinations

Alice Conway and M. Weissner

The successful outcome of baccalaureate nursing education is measured in part, 
through success in passing the nursing licensure examination. Some educators 
question if comprehensive examns, used as review tools or as mandatory 
requirements for course progression, might enhance success on the licensure 
exam. This study surveyed baccalaureate nursing programs that were members of 
the American Association of College of Nursing (AACN) to identify current 
patterns of use of comprehensive examinations of review courses. The study 
additionally sought information about remedial options available to students 
who failed the comprehensive exam. The literature revealed three general 
categories of predictors; preadmission criteria, grades during matriculation 
and comprehensive examinations. Four hundred and twenty surveys were mailed 
and two hundred and sixty returned for a return rate of 60%. Of those 
returned, eighty-five did not give an exam, but many were considering that 
option. One hundred fifty-two programs did give a comprehensive exam with 38% 
using the Mosby Assess Test, followed by the NLN Diagnostic Readiness Test. 
There was much variety in how the test was used and when given. Remedial 
options were extremely varied. 35% of the respondents stated that NCLEX-RN 
score simproved with the use of comprehensive examns. Other variables included 
revising senior courses to enhance critical thinking/decision making skills, 
and raising admission requirements.


\\\\\
Describing Vigor in Heart Failure: Use of the Cross-Case Matrix in Methods 
Triangulation

Joyce A. Fontana

Vigor and vitality scales have been included in several health status 
instruments. Capturing the essence of vigor requires supplementing scaled 
measurements of this mood with subjective, qualitative perspectives. In a 
study that combined quantitative and qualitative methods to study and analyze 
vigor data collected from people with heart failure, a cross-case matrix was 
used to facilitate triangulation and reconcile the dissonance between 
objective measures and the uniqueness of individual lived experiences. On-
going content analysis identified redundant themes and patterns of the 
personal perceptions of vigor described by 12 participants living with heart 
failure. Quantitative measures of vigor and health measured by the Vitality, 
Physical Functioning, General Health, and Mental Health scales of the SF-36 
Health Status Survey (Medical Outcomes Study); a vigor visual analogue scale; 
calculated average energy expenditures in planned exercise; age; gender; years 
living with heart failure; ejection fraction and measures of functional 
capacity were added to a matrix for each case. The matrix displayed the themes 
of the qualitative data and the relative contribution of the participant for 
each theme and provided the means to sort cases by variables of interest 
related to vigor in heart failure and compare and contrast their relationships 
to the qualitative themes.


\\\\\
Methodological Issues in Theoretical Triangulation: An Example Testing Two 
Self Care Theories

Linda S. Baas

Theoretical triangulation is an infrequently used method to test two or more 
competing theories using the same data set. This method is pertinent to 
nursing science as the discipline continues to build a theoretical foundation 
for practice. Theories that pertain to a similar concept and are at the same 
predictive or prescriptive level are appropriate competitors for 
triangulation. To conduct such a study, the investigator must apply accepted 
criteria for testing theory and use instruments that are congruent with the 
concept of interest as well as the theory. These requirements a pose dilemmas 
for the investigator that necessitates unique strategies to conduct such a 
study. To illustrate this triangulation technique, an example will be 
presented that demonstrates testing two theories of self care. Specifically, 
Orem's Self Care Deficit Theory and Erickson, Tomlin, and Swain's Modeling and 
Role Modeling (MRM) Paradigm were tested. The first theory focuses on the 
client's deficits, while the second theory focuses on the client's perception 
of resources that are available as well as needed for recovery. The Self Care 
Resource Inventory was completed by 84 persons with a diagnosis of myocardial 
infarction and 38 with heart failure. The Index of Well Being was used as an 
outcome measure. Results demonstrated the strength of Modeling and Role 
Modeling to account for a greater proportion of the variance in the outcome 
measures of self care.


\\\\\
Triangulation: A Vehicle to Explore Caregiving Relationships

Elaine T. Miller

The demands of chronic illness and longterm care require that nurses 
continually expand their knowledge to maximize the delivery of health care in 
the home. As researchers struggle to understand the world of the chronically 
ill and their caregivers, the triangulation approach can offer an excellent 
vehicle to expand knowledge of this multifaceted relationship. This 
presentation describes how between method, investigator and data triangulation 
were operationalized in three related caregiving studies that had random 
samples. Focus areas in the research were relationship quality, communication, 
conflict resolution and other attributes affecting the outcome of caregiving 
relationships. Findings from the studies support the important contribution of 
triangulation to building nursing knowledge, but also the challenges presented 
by utilization of this technique.


\\\\\
Triangulation of Data Sources to Determine the Effects of the Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome Diagnostic Label on Services

Deborah J. Hess

The purpose of this presentation is to discuss the triangulation of data 
sources being used in a descriptive study of family members' perception of the 
accessibility of health and education services before and after the Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) diagnosis. FAS, caused by prenatal exposure to alcohol, 
is recognized as one of the leading known causes of mental retardation. The 
cognitive, behavioral, and developmental effects of FAS are becoming more well 
known and it is believed that early intervention will assist the child in 
reaching his/her full potential. It is important to determine if families view 
the FAS diagnostic label as a means of accessing services.

A semi-structured interview was used with ten adoptive and biological family 
members in a FAS support group. Audio tapes of these interviews were 
transcribed, subjected to content analysis, and interpreted to develop items 
for Likert-type scales. A questionnaire containing these scales will be 
distributed in a nationwide survey of randomly selected biological, foster, 
and adoptive family members of children suspected of identified with FAS. A 
focus group composed of the original ten family members will be used to assure 
fidelity of the instrument before distribution.


\\\\\
Health Motivation, Health Behavior, and Health Status in Adolescents with 
Diabetes Mellitus

Maureen A. Frey and Vicki R. Voskuil

For adolescents in specialty care, the emphasis is often on illness and its 
management rather than health promotion. In order to learn more about health, 
we investigated the relationship among health motivation, general health 
behavior, and health status in 77 youths between the ages of 11-18 with 
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). King's systems (1981) framework 
and Deci's (1975, 1980) cognitive evaluation theory provided the theoretical 
framework for the descriptive, correlational study. Health motivation was 
measured by the Health Self-Determinism Index for Children (Cox et al., 1990). 
Health behavior was measured by the Denyes Self-Care Practices Instrument 
(Denyes, 1980). There were three indicators of health: functional, 
physical/mental, and perception of health status, measured by the 
Self-Perception Profile for Children (Harter, 1985), Brief Symptom Inventory 
(Derogatis & Melisaratos, 1983), and a single item rating scale, respectively. 
Results showed that intrinsic health motivation was related to health behavior 
(r=.43, p<.001) but extrinsic motivation was not. Health motivation was also 
related to both functional (r=.28, p<.05) and perceived (r=.24, p<.05) health 
status. Regression analysis showed that health behavior explained 19% of the 
variance in functional health status (F=8.2, p<.001) and 41% of the variance 
in perceived health status (F=24.6, p<.0001). Health motivation was not a 
significant predictor of any health outcome. Results indicate that health 
motivation has a direct effect on health outcome while the influence of health 
motivation is most likely indirect. Because of the overlap between general 
health behavior and diabetes care, (i.e., nutrition, exercise) intervention 
that include both all likely to improve health status and possibly illness 
control as well.


\\\\\
Knowledge, Beliefs, and Behavior of Colorectal and Prostate Cancer Screening 
Among Korean Americans

Katherine Kim, R. A. Brintnall, E. Yu, Y. Kean, E. Chen, J. Kim, and W. Liu

Cancer continues to pose a significant health threat to American men and 
women. Early detection and screening provides a vital opportunity to reduce 
mortality, maximize treatment outcomes, and improve survival. While national 
surveys, such as the 1987 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) Cancer 
Control Supplement, have examined cancer screening practices by adults in the 
United States, these studies do not include Asian Americans. The purpose of 
this study was to examine colorectal and prostate cancer screening knowledge, 
beliefs and behavior among Korean Americans. The sample consisted of 104 
Korean American men and 159 women, 40 to 69 years of age, living in Chicago 
area. The NHIS Cancer Control Supplement questionnaire was used to collect 
data. We translated the questionnaire to Korean using the NCHS's QDRL method 
to develop a culturally sensitive instrument. Percentages of subjects aware of 
digital rectal exam, blood stool test, and proctoscopy were 29%, 50%, and 20% 
respectively. Percentage of subjects having ever had digital rectal exam, 
blood stool test and proctoscopy were only 12, 10%, and 2% respectively. 
Factors associated with the use of colorectal and prostate cancer screening by 
the subjects were also examined. The findings indicate that majority of 
subjects aware of screening examinations forego the tests due to 
underestimating their importance; in fact, 87 to 90% of this group reported 
that not having symptoms or problems were the major reasons for not having had 
colorectal and prostate cancer screening. Implications of findings for health 
professionals will be discussed.


\\\\\
Redefining Smoking and the Self as a Nonsmoker: A Study of Smoking Cessation 
in Older Adults

Janet M. Brown

There is an overwhelming amount of literature available about the detrimental 
effect of smoking upon health. Consequently, there is an expanded interest in 
development of theoretically based smoking cessation programs. However, too 
little attention is being given to smoking cessation in the elderly and few 
studies relating the experiences of older adults who have quit smoking have 
been reported. The purpose of this study was to develop a substantive theory 
which would facilitate a better understanding of the subjective experiences of 
older adults who quit smoking. Semi-structured interviews were conducted. The 
sample consisted of 21 older adults with a mean age of 67 years who had quit 
smoking for a minimum of 3 months and a maximum of 5 years prior to being 
interviewed. Verbatim transcripts of the interviews were analyzed using the 
constant comparative method. Data analysis yielded a core variable, redefining 
smoking and the self as a nonsmoker which was indicated by the major 
theoretical categories of recognizing the need to quit, making the decision, 
learning to be a nonsmoker, and sustaining as a nonsmoker. Findings support 
that older adults who quit smoking progress through stages. Their experiences 
are consistent with the developmental tasks of older adulthood. Nurses and 
other health care providers can assist older adults in the process of 
redefining smoking and themselves as nonsmokers by implementing stage specific 
interventions and strategies that promote the redefining process. Findings 
also have implication for public policy development.

\\\\\
A Three Year Longitudinal Study Comparing Factors Influencing Psychosocial 
Adjustment to Cardiomyopathy

M. H. Frost, A. W. Kelly, D. Mangan, and K. Zarling

Similarities and differences in person-environmental relationships, 
appraisals, and coping strategies of 50 adults categorized into groups of more 
effectively and less effectively adjusting were explored and compared to 
previous years' data. Lazarus and Folkman's (1984) conception of coping as a 
process guided this descriptive study. A combination of qualitative and 
quantitative methods were used. The Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale, 
Self-Report Version, was used to categorize individuals into categories of 
more and less effectively adjusting. Other instruments include the Ways of 
Coping Questionnaire, Meaning of Illness Questionnaire and a semi-structured 
interview. Interview data was analyzed for common themes. MANOVA was used to 
determine differences in appraisals and coping strategies between individuals 
more effectively and less effectively adjusting; multiple regression was used 
to determine significant predictors of psychosocial adjustment. Year three 
follow-up data will be compared with that from years one and two. Data 
analysis is currently being completed. Results will provide useful information 
for developing nursing care aimed at enhancing adjustment to cardiomyopathy.


\\\\\
Walking for Exercise Self-Efficacy Appraisal

Donna B. Konradi

Correlations between behavior specific self-efficacy measures and 
health-related behavior have been noted, however, studies to evaluate the 
relationship between age and behavior specific self-efficacy appraisals are 
needed. The study purposes were as follows: to describe the factors included 
in a walking for exercise self-efficacy appraisal process; to compare the 
self-efficacy appraisal factors described by walkers under 65 with self-
efficacy appraisal factors described by walkers 65 and older; and to describe 
the walking for exercise routines followed by participants. A total of 44 
adults currently participating in a walking for exercise program each 
participated in a 90 minute focus group discussion session. Seven group 
discussion sessions were held (3 sessions were attended by walkers younger 
than 65 and 4 sessions were attended by walkers 65 and older). Walkers were 
recruited for participation using newspaper advertisements; interviews with 
radio personalities; public service radio announcements; recruitment at the 
shopping mall; and recruitment at a "Fit and Fifty" exercise class. Group 
discussions were recorded and transcribed to identify common themes. One 
striking self-efficacy appraisal group difference concerned the "making time 
to exercise" factor. Finding the time to exercise was a significant problem 
for persons in the under 65 group, however persons 65 and over often remarked 
that time was not a concern. Walkers 65 and over did not identify health 
concerns to be a barrier to walking for exercise adherence with any greater 
frequency than walkers younger than 65. Development of two age specific 
(younger than 65 and 65 and older) "Walking for Exercise Self-Efficacy" 
Instruments is planned.


\\\\\
Detrimental Effect of Dietary Restriction on Exercise-Induced Growth During 
Pregnancy

SeonAe Yeo, George Behrend, and Beth Boone

Voluntary endurance exercise induces an increase in basal pulsatile pituitary 
growth hormone (GH) secretion in mature women and hamsters, and this endocrine 
change is associated with increased utilization of lipids as a fuel, reduced 
body fat levels and, whenever nutrient energy is abundant, with increased 
growth in hamsters and modest increase in the lean body mass (LBM) in humans. 
Pregnancy imposes a significant energy drain in the female and in the humans 
is marked by cessation of pituitary GH secretion. Our interest was to find out 
whether (1) exercise can stimulate somatic and skeletal growth during 
pregnancy when the pituitary GH secretion is absent, (2) exercise can 
stimulate linear growth when energy cost of exercise is added to the energy 
cost of pregnancy, and (3) whether growth is possible when food restriction is 
added to exercise and pregnancy. The variables of voluntary exercise (21 
days), pregnancy (gestation=15 days), and food restriction (70% of ad lib) 
were applied in a 2 x 2 x 2 design with 6 to 12 animals in each block. We 
report here only the results for changes in body mass and skeletal length. 
Exercise induced a 31% increase in skeletal length and a 7% increase in body 
mass in non-pregnant animals. In pregnant ad libitum fed hamsters, exercise 
induced a 34% reduction in skeletal length and 10% increase in body mass. No 
growth was expressed during food restriction regardless of the reproductive 
condition. Exercise had no effect on fetal number regardless of the 
nutritional plane. The interaction of maternal food restriction and exercise 
did not have a significant negative effect on fetal mass. However, when food 
energy was limiting, voluntary exercise severely compromised maternal weight 
gain (p<.05). We conclude that when energy input is limited, additional energy 
loss is absorbed by the mother without compromising fetal growth at the 
applied energy restriction level.


\\\\\
Handrail Support, Oxygen Uptake, and Heart Rate in Women During Submaximal 
Steptreadmill Exercise

Sharon Klopfenstein Christman, Anne Folta Fish, Linda Berhard, and David Frid

The steptreadmill is a novel stairclimbing machine with 8 recirculating steps. 
The specific aim of this study was to determine oxygen uptake and heart rate 
response to three handrail support conditions in women with a history of high 
blood pressure during submaximal steptreadmill exercise. Fifteen subjects were 
randomly assigned to three handrail support conditions at step rates of 25 
steps/minute and 33 steps/minute. At 25 steps/minute, oxygen uptake and heart 
rate were significantly lower during both the five-finger and three-finger 
handrail support conditions heart were significantly lower during both the 
five-finger and three-finger handrail support conditions versus the no 
handrail support condition. Although these findings are preliminary, the no 
handrail support condition is recommended for sedentary women who begin an 
exercise program on the steptreadmill. However, if handrail support must be 
used for balance purposes, its effect on oxygen uptake and heart rate must be 
taken into consideration.


\\\\\
Morphine in the A7 Catecholamine Cell Group Produces Hyperalgesia

Jeanean E. Holden and H. K. Proudfit

Despite the ubiquitous nature of pain, it is poorly understood and often 
poorly treated clinically. Understanding physiological responses to painful 
stimuli may lead to better treatment methods. We identified methionine-
enkephalinergic (mENK) neurons from the ventromedial medulla (VMM) that 
project to the A7 catecholamine cell group in the dorsolateral pontine 
tegmentum. The A7 cell group contains noradrenergic (NE) neurons that 
innvervate the spinal cord dorsal horn and attenuate painful stimuli. To 
determine the behavioral effect of these MENK cells, we microinjected the mu 
receptor agonist, morphine sulfate (MS), into the A7 area of rats (n=8). 
Because MS is usually inhibitory, we predicted that MS microinjections would 
inhibit NE neurons, resulting in an increased response to pain, or 
hyperalgesia. Using the tail flick analgesiometric test, we obtained a 
significant hyperalgesic response from MS compared to saline controls at 5, 
15, 30 and 60 minutes post injection (p<.05; Univariate ANOVA with Bonferroni 
comparison). Our findings suggest that mENK neurons from the VMM may inhibit 
the analgesic effect of A7 noradrenergic neurons, thus preserving the 
protective aspects of a pain stimulus.


\\\\\
New Incremental Threshold Loading (ITL) Test of Respiratory Muscle Endurance 
(RME): Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)

Janet L. Larson, Margaret Covey, Jean Berry, Scott Wirtz, and Miyoko Matsuo

Patients with CoPD experience deterioration in respiratory muscle function, 
but effects on RME are not well established because there are no definitive 
tests of RME for patients with COPD. This study examined reliability and 
validity of a new ITL test of RME. Each stage consisted of two minutes of 
loaded breathing followed by one minute of unloaded breathing to reduce 
dyspnea and minimize its confounding effects. At stage one patients breathed 
against an inspiratory threshold load equal to 30% of maximal inspiratory 
pressure (PImax) and the load was increased by one 50 gm weight at each stage, 
continuing to the limits of endurance. The test was repeated three times at 
one week intervals. The sample included 45 patients with COPD (mean(SD)): age, 
66 (7) yrs. and forced expiratory volume in 1 second, 38 (17) % predicted. 
Repeated measures ANOVA revealed tests 1 and 2 were significantly different 
(p<.01), but tests 2 and 3 were not significantly different. For tests 1, 2, 
and 3 the mean (SD) final stage was 316 (135) gms, 354 (133) gms, 367 (139) 
gms, and rating of perceived breathlessness (Borg scale) an the end of the 
test was 6.5 (3.0), 7.1 (2.7), 7.1 (2.7), respectively. Test-retest 
reliability was r12-.90 and 423-.89. Differences between test 1 and 2 were < 
one stage for 71% and < two stages for 93% of subjects. Differences between 
test 2 and 3 were < one stage for 80% and < two stages for 93% of subjects. 
Validity of the new ITL was supported by a decline in PImax measured 
immediately after the end of the ITL test, suggesting that patients continued 
to the limits of their endurance as evidenced by fatigue of the inspiratory 
muscles. The new ITL test was reliable and preliminary evidence of its 
validity was established.


\\\\\
The Influence of Ovarian Steroids on Serotonin Overflow in the Amygdala of the 
Female Fluoxetine-Treated Rat

Geneal A. Brooks and M. D. Davis

Serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), such as fluoxetine (Prozac), 
are frequently used for the treatment of depression in women. Estrogen and/or 
progesterone are known to modify brain serotonin (5-HT) levels in a time- and 
region-specific manner in rats. The basolateral amygdala, involved in the 
modulation of mood, contains 5-HT neuronal pathways and estrogen and 
progesterone receptors. The presence or absence of plasma estrogen and/or 
progesterone may change the efficacy of SSRI in the basolateral amygdala. This 
study seeks to determine if serotonin overflow in the basolateral amygdala of 
fluoxetine-treated female rats is altered by the presence or absence of the 
ovarian steroids, estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P). Female rats are 
ovariectomized (ovx) and divided into four treatment groups representing 
different stages in the rat estrus cycle: 91) ovx rats receiving three 
consecutive daily injections of E2 and on day four, P; (2) ovx rats receiving 
three consecutive daily injections of E2 with vehicle on day four, (3) ovx 
rats receiving three consecutive daily injections of vehicle and P on day 
four; and (4) ovx rats receiving four consecutive daily injections of vehicle. 
Extracellular substances from the basolateral amygdala of these rats are 
collected by microdialysis and analyzed with high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) using electrochemical detection to determine serotonin 
overflow in response to acute fluoxetine treatment in all groups. It is 
hypothesized that in ovariectomized animals, those receiving estradiol 
injections will show higher serotonin overflow in response to fluoxetine when 
compared to those fluoxetine-treated animals receiving vehicle alone. 
Treatment with P in E2-primed animals is expected to dampen the effort of E2 
on serotonin overflow. Results and implications will be discussed.

\\\\\
Effects of Reduced Clinical Hours on Critical Thinking Skills: A Pilot Study

Carole A. Pepa and Cynthia A. Russell

One strategy to accommodate increased numbers of nursing students and 
decreased inpatient medical surgical censuses is to reduce clinical hours. 
Little is know, however, about the effects of reduced clinical hours on the 
students' ability to critically think. The purpose of this study was to 
compare critical thinking scores of a small group of students (N=12) before 
and after the reduction of medical-surgical clinical hours. Students were 
matched on age, course grade, and instructor. The Clinical Nursing Assessment 
Medical-Surgical Nursing I (Test CNS01) was used to measure critical thinking. 
A paired t-test was used to compare the critical thinking scores of the 
matched pairs. No difference between the two groups was found (t=2.29, p=.06). 
These findings provide exploratory information about the critical thinking 
skills of students in the clinical setting and have implications for teaching 
strategies and future research.


\\\\\
The Fine Art of Caring: Analysis of Students' Papers Relating Fine Arts and 
Nursing

Beatrice B. Turkoski

Upper division nursing students are well aware of increasingly complex science 
of nursing. The exercise described in this paper was designed to add a new 
dimension to upper division students' perception of nursing as art; to develop 
and strengthen their understanding of nursing as a part of the broader picture 
of humanity and human endeavor. Students in Concepts class are asked to 
identify a work of art-a piece of music, painting, sculpture, poetry-of their 
choice that has a relationship to how their concept of nursing. They are asked 
to articulate their feelings in writing, and to share with the class the 
connections they have made. Analyses of randomly selected papers (N=140) 
identified that the symbolic connections students made to specific works of 
art or music addressed eight major themes. The primary theme was nursing as 
caring; other themes included: nursing as mothering, nursing as a process, 
nursing as color, nursing as spiritual, nursing as helping, and nursing as 
strength. Each theme is discussed with illustrations of the words of the 
students' as they explain how nursing is related to a particular piece of fine 
art. A survey of students six months and one year after the assignment 
indicates that more than 70% of students remembered the piece of art they had 
chosen and considered this a worthwhile use of their time. They were more 
aware of nursing as more than science and more than art-they began to see 
nursing ..."in a different light, as more meaningful in the whole scheme of 
things." This study illustrates one method of helping students to relate their 
humanities studies and their scientific studies to their professional nursing 
role. The study further illustrate that students do remember those exercises 
and experiences that they see as valuable.


\\\\\
]Integrating Student Learning Experiences and Research Objectives on a HCFA 
Funded Grant

Barbara O'Brien, P. Martin, M. Graham, K. Hickock, and D. Uddin

Problem. A college of nursing and a metropolitan teaching hospital are 
conducting a CHF Outreach Study addressing: readmission rate, quality of life, 
impact of home care educational intervention, and expansion of student 
experiences. A 4-group experimental design was used to test patient outcomes. 
This paper will address the challenges over come in setting up the research 
intervention as a student experience.

Sample. Delivering the educational intervention each quarter involves 10-30 
students. Approximately 6 students provide continuity during academic breaks 
through a co-op education experience.

Methodology. Challenges include securing adequate numbers of students for a 
fluctuating sample, establishing curriculum placement, standardizing 
interventions, establishing a co-op experience addressing a community-based, 
research focused clinical.

Results. The first year found educational goals on track.

Implications. There is potential for many applications as nursing programs 
seek community experiences and health care researchers study the safety and 
efficacy of changes in health care delivery.


\\\\\
Stresses and Challenges of Clinical Experience Among ADN and BSN Students

Marilyn H. Oermann

Limited research is available as to the stresses and challenges of clinical 
experience among nursing students, and no studies have compared student 
perceptions of their clinical practice in ADN and BSN programs. This study 
examined the stresses and challenges of clinical experience and identified 
factors that inhibited and facilitated learning in the practice setting. 
Students (N=461) from a random sample of ten ADN and BSN programs throughout 
the midwest completed the Clinical Stress Questionnaire. Although students 
were moderately stressed in clinical practice, they were challenged by their 
experiences. ANOVA indicated significant differences in the stress level 
across clinical courses (F[5,406]=9.58, p<.0001). Students in pediatric 
nursing courses in both ADN and BSN programs reported the highest degree of 
stress. Students enrolled in foundations of nursing courses experienced the 
least amount of stress in their clinical practice. A t-test revealed 
significant differences in stress (t=2.16, p=.03) and challenge (t=2.04, 
p=.042) scores between ADN and BSN students. ADN students were more stressed 
and challenged in clinical than BSN students. Stress increased with the level 
in the program with the second year of the ADN program and senior year of the 
BSN program being the most stressful (F[5,401]=7.64, p<.0001). Factors 
identified by both ADN and BSN students which created a stressful clinical 
experience for them included interacting with and observations by the teacher, 
fear of making errors, and fear of contracting diseases. Factor analysis with 
Varimax rotation revealed four sets of emotions: stimulation, fear, 
disappointment and confidence. Overall, students found clinical to be 
stimulating and a way of developing their confidence in practice.


\\\\\
Use of the LSQ and Kolb's Learning Style Model in Assessing Student Nurses

Cheryl M. Bourguignon

Many nursing educators use Kolb's Experiential Learning Model to assess the 
learning styles of student nurses. At present, no reliable instrument exists 
that demonstrates Kolb's proposed four construct model (Thinking, Watching, 
Feeling, Doing). Kolb's original instrument, the LSI, and poor reliability and 
only three constructs could be extracted during factor analysis rather than 
the four proposed. Attempting to correct some of the flaws in Kolb's LSI, 
Marshall and Merritt (1985) developed a new instrument, the Learning Style 
Questionnaire (LSQ). After initial testing of the LSQ, the reliability was 
much higher but again only three of Kolb's original constructs were extracted 
during factor analysis. The purpose of this study therefore, was to determine 
if the LSQ could be used to assess Kolb's learning styles in a sample of 
student nurses. The sample of 274 basic and RN completion nursing students 
ranged in age from 19-55 years (mean=27.2, sd=8.1). Exploratory factor 
analysis on the LSQ extracted only three of Kolb's original four constructs. 
Using LISREL for confirmatory factor analysis, the LSQ model with only three 
latent factors (Thinking, Feeling, Doing) possessed good data-model fit (chi-
square=5.36, 3df, p=0.148, GFI=.073, and AGFI=0.946). These results call into 
question Kolb's original four construct learning style model. Nursing 
educators should be skeptical about using the LSQ and Kolb's model to identify 
the learning styles of student nurses until they are further tested and 
revised.


\\\\\
A Comparison of Nurses' and Patients' Perception of Patient Needs and 
Satisfaction in the Emergency Department

Jennifer J. Hostutler

Meeting the needs of an emergency department patient can be a challenging 
task. Often the patient may have needs that are not expressed to the nurse. 
When this occurs unmet needs may lead to dissatisfaction with care. The 
purpose of this study was two-fold: (1) to determine whether patients and 
nurses have the same perception of patient needs; and (2) to determine which 
patient needs are important for patient satisfaction.

A nonprobability convenience sample was obtained for the patient population by 
randomly selecting 600 patients that were seen in the emergency department 
between February 1 and April 30, 1995. Nurses working in the emergency 
department during the same time period constituted the second sample. Both 
samples were given a questionnaire to complete. There were twenty-seven, four 
point Likert scale questions for each questionnaire. The patient 
questionnaires had an additional ten questions that were open-ended. Content 
focused on communication, visitation, and education. The study site was an 
acute care community hospital in an urban setting that averages 70,000 
emergency visits a year.

Preliminary analysis of 174 questionnaires reveals that there are several 
areas where nurses and patients have different perceptions of patient needs.


\\\\\
Development of an Instrument to Measure Patient Satisfaction with 
Postoperative Pain Management

Bunny Pozehl, S. Barnason, L. Zimmerman, J. Rowles, D. Degner, and D. Jones

The purpose of this psychometric study was to develop an instrument to measure 
patient satisfaction with postoperative pain management. Measurement of 
patient satisfaction with pain management is a standard set forth by the 
American Pain Society (APS). The only available measure of patient 
satisfaction is the APS survey which may be limited in sensitivity to factors 
influencing patient satisfaction. A 25 item, 4 point likert scale (strongly 
agree to strongly disagree), was developed and tested at hospital discharge in 
a convenience sample of 101 patients undergoing total hip replacement, total 
knee replacement, or microlumbar discectomy. Content validity of the 
instrument was established by a  panel of clinical experts in pain management. 
Construct validation consisted of principal axis factor analysis procedures. 
Thirteen items with factor loadings ranging from .39 to .79 were retained. A 
one factor solution accounting for 41% of the variance was chosen based on the 
Kaiser criterion, the scree plot, and interpretability of the data. Internal 
consistency reliability for the 13 item instrument was .89. An instrument with 
documented validity and reliability to measure patient satisfaction with 
postoperative pain management is essential to measure progress towards the 
Agency of Health Care Policy and Research's goal of enhanced patient 
satisfaction with pain management. Further testing of this instrument is in 
progress.


\\\\\
Nursing Benefits of a Patient/Family Centered Care Model

Mary E. Muller

Innovations diffuse through organizations at varying rates. Individual 
perceptions and decisions contribute to this variance. Therefore, evaluation 
of a new practice model must include the individual's perceptions of the 
model. This study considered individuals' ratings as part of the evaluation of 
a Patient/Family Centered Care (PFCC) model. Model implementation began in all 
units of a tertiary-care hospital in Central Ohio in January 1992. Data was 
collected for this study in March 1995. Research packets delivered to all 
patient care staff contained an Assessment of PFCC Model Implementation (APMI) 
and the Job Diagnostic Survey (JDS). The 10 item APMI measured the 
individual's perception of the extent of PFCC model implementation on the 
unit. The range of possible APMI scores was 4 to 40. The 48 item JDS contains 
15 subscales measuring job characteristics, satisfaction with work 
environment, and personal attitudes about work. The RNs also responded to the 
21 item Control Over Nursing Practice Scale (CONPS). Four hundred eighty staff 
members participated, 375 RNs and 105 non RNs. Participants were divided into 
three groups by APMI scores: Group 1 (score < 22), Group 2 (score 22-27) and 
Group 3 (score > 27). ANOVA revealed significant differences among the groups 
for most subscales of the JDS and for RN CONP scores. Members of Group 3 
(those with high PFCC implementation scores) and significantly higher scores 
for 8 JDS subscales, including Autonomy, General Job Satisfaction, and 
Satisfaction wit Co-workers. RNs in group 3 had higher CONPS scores. While 
there were several limitations to this study, the results suggested that 
individuals perceptions of PFCC model implementation was critical to the 
model's impact on their work satisfaction and control of practice.


\\\\\
Nursing Care Requirements for the Short Stay (23 Hour) Patient

Rose Lach, Sandra Robertson, Mary Pabst, Mary Ann Colletti, and Linda 
Greenberg

Short stay (23 hour) patients have a variety of diagnoses and procedures 
performed, and an uncertain length of stay on nursing care units. Little data 
exist on the actual nursing care and staffing skill mix requirements for 23 
hour patients. As a result nursing care requirements for these patients can 
only be estimated when calculating the daily workload using traditional 
inpatient patient classification systems. This study identified a) the 
critical aspects of nursing care, b) the hours of nursing care required, and 
c) desirable nursing care giver skill mix for the short stay (23 hour) 
patient. Patients (N=200) within each of ten diagnostic categories were 
randomly selected from the daily patient census over a two month period at a 
large university medical center. Upon admission and discharge from the nursing 
care unit, patients were classified using the indicators from the Type VI 
Medicus Classification Tool. Interrater reliability was 90%. Nursing personnel 
assigned to patients were also asked to describe the care they were providing. 
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize patient diagnostic categories, 
patient classification, the aspects of care, total hours of care required, and 
care giver skill level. Results will be utilized in determining nursing 
staffing decisions for the 23 hour patient.


\\\\\
Nursing Students' Perceptions of Caring Behaviors in the Teaching-Learning 
Environment

Marjorie A. Schaffer

Nursing educators have been challenged to develop strategies that integrate 
the concept and practice of caring into curricula. Dialogue between students 
and faculty is one strategy for promoting students' understanding of caring 
and their motivation to care for others. Senior and junior nursing students 
(n=76) evaluated the effectiveness of faculty-facilitated small groups that 
addressed concerns and events in the teaching-learning environment. An 
analysis of student perceptions of caring from faculty and peers was conducted 
based on a caring behavior framework. In addition to open-ended questions on 
caring behaviors in students and faculty and outcomes of group participation, 
students evaluated the frequency of four specific caring behaviors 
(willingness to help, sensitivity, presence, and supportiveness) exhibited by 
their peers and nursing faculty. Students identified 51 instances of faculty 
caring, 46 instances of caring from peers, and very few uncaring behaviors. 
Themes of group participation outcomes described by students were: 1) 
facilitation of communication, 2) provision of a support system, and 3) the 
building of relationships in the nursing education community. Although pressed 
with extensive curricular demands, nursing faculty can promote students' 
perceptions of a caring learning environment and the development of a sense of 
community support by providing opportunities for dialogue about student 
learning experiences. Dialogue between faculty and students encouraged a 
reciprocal caring process and provided an impetus for making changes that 
increased student satisfaction.


\\\\\
Emotional Well-Being in People with Chronic Disabilities: A Longitudinal 
Analysis

N. Margaret Wineman

The purpose of this research was to examine the effect of illness uncertainty 
on emotional well-being (EWB) in people with chronic disabilities. The 
research is unique in that it examines the relationship in two comparative 
groups, those with multiple sclerosis (MS) and those with spinal cord injury 
(SCI), groups that may be at uncommonly high risk for negative outcomes 
because of their disabilities but with marked differences in illness 
uncertainty. Also examined were the effects of functional ability, negative 
life events, daily hassles, personal and social resources, appraisal of 
stress, and coping behavior. To examine effects, a model, based on the 
relationship among stress, appraisal, and coping proposed by Lazarus and 
Folkman, was tested longitudinally. Survey data were collected during three 
yearly home interviews from 324 subjects with MS and 179 with SCI. Results of 
model testing support the idea that a person's long-term response to a chronic 
disability is the outcome of a system of interrelated variables that affect 
EWB. Influential variables include contextual stressors, personal and social 
resources, appraisal of stress, and coping. Individuals with MS< compared to 
those with SCI, may be at higher risk for the negative consequences of 
continual uncertainty; they perceived their disability as more threatening, 
felt less able to handle negative life events, experienced more daily hassles, 
and felt greater emotional distress. For all subjects, a surprising finding 
was that people with longstanding disabilities may learn how to manage when 
their exposure to harm and their uncertainty are continually high. The model 
provides a wellness-oriented framework for understanding the processes that 
influence and predict EWB, and thus, it provides guidance for nursing 
interventions in the home setting.


\\\\\
Implementation of Pressure Ulcer Prevention in a Medical Center

Barbara Pieper, M. Sugrue, C. Heimann, K. Sprague, and M. Weiland

This prospective, descriptive study examined pressure ulcer prevention 
strategies implemented in 7 facilities. For 2 months on selected units, all 
patients were followed until discharged. The Braden Scale was used for risk 
assessment. Patient assessment forms were developed for the study. Patients 
followed numbered 694 with 210 being assessed at risk for pressure ulcers at 
the first data collection point. For all patients, significantly more (p<.05) 
had a pressure reducing bed surface (at risk, 60%), were found with the head 
of the bed in low position (at risk, 82%), had a lift sheet (at risk, 60%), or 
had body lotion (at risk, 63%). Significantly few patients had a bed trapeze 
(at risk, 13%), positioning wedge (at risk, 26%), incontinence cleaner or 
barrier ointment (at risk, 21%), heel protection (at risk, 20%), or a chair 
cushion (at risk, 15%). Patients at risk had significantly (p<.05) few 
pressure ulcer prevention care plans or charting notations, posted turning 
schedule, or pressure ulcer educational materials at the bedside. Patients at 
risk for pressure ulcers had significantly (p<.05) more prevention 
interventions (M=4.5) than patients not at risk (M=3). Similar statistics were 
present at the other data collection points. Although nursing interventions 
are based on patients' assessments, the implementation of prevention 
interventions was low. These results have implications for quality of care, 
cost, and legal concerns. Future research should explore factors which affect 
implementation of pressure ulcer prevention strategies.


\\\\\
Medication Administration Through Enteral Feeding Catheters

D. C. Belknap, M. Petermann, and C. F. Seifert

Enteral feeding catheter (EFC) obstruction is a common complication when used 
for administration of oral medication forms. This descriptive survey was 
designed to investigate characteristics of EFC obstruction and current 
knowledge and practices regarding medication administration through EFCs in 
the intensive care unit (ICU) population. From a random sample of 12,069 
members of the American Association of Critical Care Nurses who were mailed a 
postcard invitation to participate, 1,700 agreed to participate and 1,167 
(68.7%) returned survey questionnaires. Nurses estimated that 35% of their 
patients received 8.9 medication doses/day through the EFC. Medication 
obstruction rate was 15.6% (+20.9). Crushed solid tablets, enteric coated (EC) 
tablets, and sustained-release (SR) medications contributed to EFC 
obstruction, although liquid forms often were available. Nurses' primary 
source of knowledge about medication administration through EFCs was clinical 
practice (56.9%) and consultation with peers (21.7%); only 19% had attended a 
relevant inservice. Content of written agency guidelines varied considerably. 
Of eight recommended administration techniques, 74% of nurses used > two that 
were inappropriate. Factors significantly associated with lower EFC 
obstruction rates (p<.001) included 1) assistance from pharmacy service to 
insure liquid medication forms, 2) attendance at a relevant seminar or 
inservice, and 3) not routinely crushing and administering EC or SR 
medications through the EFC. Implications: Collaboration between nursing and 
pharmacy services to insure delivery of liquid medications and avoid crushed 
medications may reduce the high rate of catheter obstruction due to medication 
administration. There is a need for more formal dissemination of research-
based practice guidelines.


\\\\\
Personal Expenditures of Patients Undergoing Chemotherapy

K. Moore

The cost of health care is a significant barrier to prevention and treatment 
of illness and disease (Kronfeld, 1992). Most literature on costs discusses 
costs to the system for the delivery of care, yet personal expenses for 
catastrophic disease such as cancer can consume a family's entire resources. 
Seven percent of all hospital discharges in this country carry a primary 
diagnosis of cancer (Elixhauser, Andrews, & Fox, 1993). Subsequent costs may 
be conceptualized as direct and indirect (Clarke, 1993); human (Varricchio, 
1994); physical, instrumental, and administrative (Mor, 1987); or attitudinal, 
temporal, geographic, and financial (Bashshur, Homan, & Smith, 1994). The 
research question is: what are the types and magnitude of costs sustained by 
patients undergoing chemotherapy? Birenbaum's Cost Information Interview 
Schedule (Birenbaum & Clarke-Stefan, 1992) was administered to 30 adults 
receiving chemotherapy in an urban clinical setting. Items include cost 
categories of transportation, lodging, medications, supplies and equipment, 
child and elder care, home maintenance and repair services. Costs not covered 
by insurance will indicate which community resources would be of greatest 
benefit to the patient.

\\\\\
Prevalence & Determinants of Preventive Health Behaviors of Older Rural Women

Carol H. Pullen, K. L. Fiandt, and S. N. Walker

As women age they become increasingly at risk for chronic illness and injury. 
Research indicates that older women experience more disability than men and 
that older rural women may be among the lower users of preventive services. 
The purpose of this study was to a) describe the prevalence of receipt of 
clinical preventive services recommended by the US Preventive Services Task 
Force (screening, counseling, immunizations) and the practice of healthy 
lifestyles, and b) determine the extent to which personal influences (sources 
of information and access to care) explain preventive health behavior among 
older women in rural Nebraska. A descriptive correlational study design 
employed computer-assisted telephone survey methodology to collect data from 
102 women aged 65 and older in four rural counties. The interview schedule 
included established instruments with known psychometric characteristics as 
well as inventories developed by the investigators. While the women reported 
generally healthy lifestyles, the prevalence of receipt of most preventive 
services was quite low. Hierarchical regression analyses explained 23% to 77% 
of the variance in five categories of preventive health behavior (screening, 
counseling, immunizations, health-promoting lifestyle change attempts in past 
year), with both personal and contextual variables making significant 
contributions. Understanding of the patterns and determinants of preventive 
health behavior is essential for the design of interventions to enhance such 
behavior among rural older women, an underserved population.


\\\\\
Child Pain: Behavioral Cues Used by Mothers and Nurses to Identify Pain In 
Children According to Pain Intensity and Age

Kathy Jost, Dianne Miller, and Carleeta Nelson

Ability to recognize behavioral cues indicating pain intensity in children is 
essential to pain management. However, age level and pain intensity amy alter 
this cuing and challenge the caregiver, whether parent or professional. As 
part of a larger descriptive study, the purpose of this research was to 
contrast cues used by mothers and nurses to assess pain in children of 
different ages experiencing various levels of pain intensity. Using a 
convenience sample (n=255) of 75 sets of matched subjects (hospitalized child 
3-18, the mother, and the nurse), simultaneous but independent pain intensity 
ratings (Wong-Baker Faces Scale) were collected from each set member. In face-
to-face interviews conducted by clinical nurse specialists or pediatric nurse 
educators, mothers and nurses were asked how they knew, or what data they 
used, to tell when the child was in pain. Given a list of cues published by 
AHCPR, they were asked also to prioritize cues. Using content analysis, cue 
inventories were identified and correlations between rank ordering according 
to pain intensity and age were tested using Spearman's rank correlation 
coefficient. Findings offer a predominant cue inventory by pain intensity 
level and age with priority differences ascribed to cues by mothers and 
nurses.


\\\\\
Factors Influencing Protection of Children from Farm Injuries

Barbara C. Lee, L. S. Jenkins, and J. Westaby

What are the factors affecting protection of children from farming activities 
known to be hazardous? A descriptive correlational study was conducted guided 
by the theory of planned behavior. This theory posits that health promoting 
behaviors are most accurately predicted by behavioral control. Using mail 
survey research methods, a stratified random sample of 1,151 Wisconsin dairy 
farm fathers with children younger than 14 years of age completed a 200-item 
instrument which measured theoretical variables in relation to the subjects' 
intentions to allow their young children to engage in three high risk 
activities: driving a tractor, being an extra rider on a tractor, and being 
near the hind legs of dairy cows. With a response rate of 87.5%, demographic 
data depicted the typical dairy farm father as a 41-year-old high school 
graduate who works more than 70 hours/week on the farm and has a household of 
5.1 family members. For the tractor driving behavior, multivariate analyses 
revealed that attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived control account for 
nearly four-fifths (R2adj=.79) of the variance of subjects' behavioral 
intention and that attitudes regarding intentions to permit a child to drive a 
tractor were more predictive (beta=.60) than subjective norms (beta=.26) or 
perceived control (beta=.09). The factor most closely associated with fathers' 
attitudes was the desire for a child to gain work experience (r=.74, p=.001). 
Results suggest specific approaches for nursing interventions designed to 
influence protective behaviors of family farm parents.


\\\\\
Parents' Responses to Bone Marrow Transplantation for their Children with 
Genetic Disorders

Cynthia A. Prows and Gail C. McCain

The prognosis associated with Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT) for children 
with genetic disorders is uncertain, with varying results including: cure, 
stabilization of symptoms, debilitating morbidity, and death. This grounded 
theory study described ten parents' responses when BMT was offered as a 
treatment option for their children with genetic disorders. The mother and 
father respondents participated in separate, in-depth interviews at the time 
BMT was considered as a treatment option. Interviews were tape-recorded and 
transcribed verbatim. The Ethnograph software program was used to assist with 
data management. Data was analyzed with the constant comparative method. The 
basic social problem confronting parents was the conflicting alternatives of 
life, suffering, and death for their children. It was certain that these 
children would die from their genetic disorders, but without having to endure 
the pain and suffering of a BMT. Alternatively the BMT treatment would be 
difficult, but with the chance of arresting disease progression. The basic 
social processes used by parents were: 'weighing conflicting alternatives,' 
and 'taking-any-chance.' Strategies used to weigh conflicting alternatives 
included: searching for information, downward comparisons, and finding 
spiritual meaning. Strategies related to 'taking-any-chance' included: 
acquiring resources, living day-to-day, managing relationships, and 'sticking 
to decision.'


\\\\\
Pediatric Critical Care Nurses' Beliefs, Attitude, and Clinical Practice 
Related to Pain Management in Critically Ill Children

Carol Pederson

Critically ill children experience pain from a number of sources. Nurses are 
responsible for pain management, thus it is important to examine their 
beliefs, attitude, and practice related to pain management. In this 
descriptive study, 26 pediatric critical care nurses responded to a 35-item 
survey. Results indicate that nurses learned about pain management from their 
basic nursing program (15%) and current work environment (85%). Sources that 
provided the basis for nurses' pain management strategies were patient 
assessment (96%), physician PRN orders (96%), nurses' verbal report from 
previous shift (92%), and patient/family request or suggestions (42%). 
Although 58% said that pain is managed well on their unit, 23% said that 
choral hydrate is often used to quiet children, rather than meet their 
psychological needs. Nurses who learned about pain management from their work 
environment disagreed more strongly that (a) children do not remember pain, 
r=.66, p<.001; (b) pain can always be measured objectively, r=.56, p=.001; and 
(c) children experience pain less intensely than adults do, r=.47, p=.008. 
Baccalaureate education correlated with (a) basing pain management strategies 
on information from journal articles, and (b) agreeing that pain management is 
not stressful, r=.47, p=.008. Implication include providing information to 
nurses.


\\\\\
Nurses' Responses to Maternity Care Changes: Comparison Across Time

K. M. Stolte and S. T. Myers

This descriptive, longitudinal study strived to determine the changes 
maternity nurses changing to Single-Room Maternity Care (SRMC) experience. 
Peters (1987) chaos model was the framework. A convenience sample of 
experienced staff RNs from 4 hospitals was used. The Changes in Maternity Care 
Questionnaire (CMCQ) was administered prior to initiation of SRMC, but after 
completion of cross-training, and at 3, 6, and 12 months after SRMC began. The 
CMCQ addresses major changes, personal involvement, and perceptions of role 
and responsibility. Based on personal interviews, the CMCQ has content 
validity. Cronbach alphas for 3 subscales range from .64 to.93. Twenty-two 
(32%) nurses completed all 4 questionnaires. Descriptive statistics reveal 
most changes' impact were less positive throughout the study than at the 
outset. Cost containment, short stay and new environment change scores 
remained similar or slightly higher. Perception of self in professional role 
was significantly lower (p=.023) 3 months after SRMC began and never rose back 
to the original level.


\\\\\
Coping, Hardiness, Health Status, and Absenteeism in Staff Nurses

Barbara J. Martin

Absenteeism is a serious organizational problem that jeopardizes the quality 
of patient care and increases healthcare costs. The focus of withdrawal 
behavior research has been on work-related reasons for withdrawal as opposed 
to personal disposition toward the use of withdrawal as a function of coping 
with personal problems or life stress. This disposition may cause certain 
employees to be resistant to changing their excessive absence patterns. This 
study examined the relationships between coping, personality hardiness, and 
voluntary absence. The random sample consisted of 149 non-unionized full-time 
staff nurses working in a large tertiary care medical center. Coping, 
hardiness, and health status were assessed for each subject utilizing the Ways 
of Coping Questionnaire (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), the Personal Views Survey 
(Kobasa, 1979), and two items from the National Health Interview Survey (Adams 
& Benson, 1991). Subject absences were tracked for 26 weeks. Periods of 
absence and attendance were qualitatively assessed. Discriminant analyses 
demonstrated that the most consistent predictor variables for coping strategy 
of problem-solving. Higher scores for all three predictors were associated 
with lower absenteeism. Nurses frequently described themselves as fatigued and 
stressed while a majority believed that sick time benefits should be used for 
physical illness and "mental health" days. Information regarding the 
relationships between coping, hardiness, and absence withdrawal behavior is 
valuable for the nurse manager in terms of individual and unit systems 
assessment and intervention. Recommended interventions may serve to lessen the 
stress that nurses experience, improve their physical and psychological well-
being, and strengthen ineffective coping skills.


\\\\\
The Effects of Implementing Patient-Focused Care Model on the Role of Nurse 
Manager

Richard W. Redman and Katherine R. Jones

Workplace restructuring typically attempts to redesign the nursing care 
delivery model from a department to a patient centered focus. Ancillary 
services have been brought into nursing's sphere of control and unit-based 
multifunctional roles have been created to function under the supervision of 
the RN. Evaluation of these models has been limited and generally focuses on 
the reaction of various stakeholders or costs of the models. We examined the 
impact of implementing patient-focused care models on the role of the nurse 
manager in two acute care hospitals. Interviews were conducted with 
approximately 20 nurse and department managers with direct responsibility for 
implementing the new roles and structure of care delivery. The structured 
interviews were conducted within the first 6 months of model implementation. 
Interview questions focused on the managers' perceived advantages and barriers 
to implementation of the model, the impact of the models on the unit working 
environment, expected outcomes for patients and the organization, and the 
changes that resulted in their managerial roles as a result of the 
restructuring effort. Results of these interviews indicate that the role of 
the unit-based manager is significantly influenced by the redesign of 
caregiver roles. It becomes increasingly complex as unskilled workers are 
brought onto the caregiving team and ancillary services become the 
responsibility of the unit. General issues include managing larger numbers of 
nonprofessional workers, recruitment, retention, and attendance problems, and 
team dynamics. Specific issues relate to respiratory treatments and 
environmental services regulatory standards and supplies. Non-nursing 
department managers tend to have different views than nurse managers. 
Implications for organizations considering similar innovations will be 
presented.


\\\\\
How Do Nurses Spend Their Time?

Linda D. Urden and Jeanne Roode

Dynamic changes in health care require accurate data on which decisions can be 
made. By examining processes and systems of current practice, areas for 
improvement can be identified with subsequent strategies to implement change. 
The purpose of this study was to 1) Determine the amount of time that RNs and 
Nurse Extenders spend in various direct and indirect patient care activities; 
2) Describe the differences in time among nursing unit specialties; and 3) 
Examine shift variations in time. This descriptive study utilized work 
sampling to collect data to examine the distribution of staff work activities. 
The data collection instrument was developed by a research team who pilot-
tested it and made minor revisions. Inter-rater reliability of all data 
collectors was established with 80% agreement. Data were collected on all 
nursing units on all shifts within the 529-bed community teaching hospital 
during a six-week period. Unit demographics, such as unit census, workload 
index, staff mix, and variation from staffing categories: direct care, 
indirect care, documentation, unit-related, and personal Registered Nurse time 
spent in the various activities were: 36% direct care; 24% indirect care; 4% 
unit-related; 26% documentation; and 15% personal. Nurse Extenders (LPNs and 
non-licensed direct care givers) spent the following: 35% direct care; 24% 
indirect care; 10% unit-related; 15% documentation; and 16% personal. There 
were differences between shifts and among the various nursing unit specialties 
in the amount of time for both categories of caregivers. This study provides 
essential information for the evaluation of any programmatic, staff mix, or 
work redesign change that may occur in the future. In our immediate future is 
the implementation of a computerized documentation system; study data will be 
utilized to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of such a costly 
financial investment. The data will also be used to examine other quality and 
fiscal variables that impact the delivery of patient care.


\\\\\
Multiple Authors in Nursing Research: Contributions and Concerns

Ann H. White, Nadine Coudret, and Cynthia Goodwin
Multiple authorship in nursing research has complex practical and ethical 
implications for the profession. The purpose of this descriptive study was to 
identify contributions of nurse authors to published multiauthored nursing 
research projects. Factors impacting authorship inclusion and sequencing were 
investigated, as well as problems, issues, and concerns about multiple 
authorship in nursing. A survey questionnaire was sent to 225 nurse first 
authors of articles in 15 nursing journals representing research, general, and 
specialty practice. Responses were received from 167 authors (75.1%). 
Respondents identified which authors made significant contributions to seven 
aspects of the project: (1) initial conception; (2) resources; (3) study 
design; (4) data collection; (5) data analysis and interpretation; (6) writing 
first draft; and (7) revising the article. Issues and concerns about decision-
making, authorship inclusion and sequencing, and authorship guidelines were 
identified. Data from this study will support the establishment of 
professional guidelines for multiple authorship in nursing.


\\\\\
The Validation of a Causal Model of Hospital Staff Nurse Absenteeism

Kathryn L. Hope and Roma Lee Taunton

Absenteeism rates of hospital employees have risen over the last few years, 
placing a burden on cost, effectiveness, efficiency of the work force. 
However, a body of research that identifies factors contributing to nurse 
absenteeism is lacking. The purpose of this study was to validate a causal 
model of hospital staff registered nurse absenteeism.

The model was built on previous models (i.e., Steers and Rhodes, Brooke) and 
research findings reported in the literature. Within the model, 
characteristics of the individual, structural characteristics, and 
environmental characteristics were hypothesized to affect absenteeism directly 
or indirectly through the intervening variables of absence culture, job 
satisfaction, job involvement, and commitment. The convenience sample 
consisted of 422 full-time, staff registered nurses (64% response rate) 
employed in two acute care hospitals throughout the study period. The majority 
of predictor variables were assessed by questionnaires with established 
reliability and validity. Two absence measures (single-day absence and 
frequency of absence episodes) were collected over 12 months. Using, 
structural equation modeling analyses, major findings of the study were as 
follows: (a) the model was not validated, (b) absence culture was the major 
predictor of absenteeism, and (c) separate models emerged when hospitals were 
analyzed individually. The findings from this study support findings from a 
recent study that found causes of absenteeism to be hospital specific.


\\\\\
A Conceptual Framework for Caregiver Training in Dementing Illnesses

Kathleen C. Buckwalter, Geri Richards Hall, Linda Gerdner, Marilyn Sime, Ann 
Kelly, and Beverly Richards

The Progressively Lowered Stress Threshold (PLST) model is used extensively in 
planning and evaluating care for people with Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementing illnesses. While it has been tested in institutional settings, the 
model was developed for use by in-home caregivers. The National Caregivers 
Training Project is a 4 year multi-site study comparing family caregivers 
trained using the PLST model with those who received traditional information 
and support services. Caregivers were followed for one year.

Effectiveness of the model was evaluated using both quantitative and 
qualitative measures. Quantitative measures, collected at baseline, three, 
six, and twelve months, included instruments to measure caregiver mood states, 
depression, and knowledge of Alzheimer's disease. Instruments for care 
recipients measured function in activities of daily living, incidence of 
untoward behaviors, weight, sleep habits, and medication usage. Qualitative 
measures, collected at baseline and biweekly for six months, included 
caregiver interviews, daily behavior logs to record caregiver responses to 
untoward behavior, and perceptions of the research team during biweekly 
telephone contacts with caregivers. This symposium presents the first data 
analysis from the National Caregivers Training Project.


\\\\\
Effects of Exercise on Knee Joints with Osteoarthritis: A Pilot Study of 
biological Markers

Older people who have Osteoarthritis (OA) of weight bearing joints are more 
likely than age matched peers to have a sedentary lifestyle. The effects of 
exercise on cartilage metabolism in OA are not well know. The purpose of this 
study was to determine the feasibility of using biological markers as well as 
clinical parameters to measure the effects of a low intensity weight bearing 
exercise program on community dwelling individuals (mean age=69.5 yr.) with OA 
of the knee. Synovial fluid keratan sulfate and hydroxyproline were measured 
as biological markers of knee joint cartilage degradation. The Arthritis 
Impact Measurement Scales (AIMS) were used to measure health status and a 
Visual Analog Scale was used for pain assessment before and after 
intervention. An exercise group (n=15) received a thrice weekly 12 week low 
intensity exercise program and a weekly educational program. A minimal 
treatment group (n=15) received the education program only. Synovial fluid was 
obtained in 11 subjects before and after the intervention. Levels of keratan 
sulfate and hydroxyproline did not increase. Pain levels declined in the 
exercise group and both groups showed improvement on the AIMS. These data 
provide no evidence that this program of exercise increases cartilage 
degradation and supports use of biological and clinical parameters to examine 
outcomes of exercise as an intervention for OA of the knee.


\\\\\
Increasing Knowledge and Improving Attitudes of Health Care Providers 
Utilizing a Train-The-Trainer Model to Reach Rural Communities with 
Alzheimer's Education

Deborah Marks Conley and Betty G. Foster

Reaching rural communities with Alzheimer's Disease (AD) education is an NIA 
funded project aimed at increasing levels of knowledge and improving attitudes 
among targeted health care professionals, specifically nurses, working with 
individuals with dementia. Volunteer leaders in five regions identified 
professional nurses, nursing home administrators, and social workers for 
training. Two days of intensive training were completed utilizing a training 
manual developed by the two authors/trainers. Sessions included didactic, 
experiential, interactive and case studies. Trainers modeled proven teaching-
learning techniques and demonstrated use of the manual. Topical areas included 
adult teaching-learning principles, epidemiology of AD, communication 
techniques, planning therapeutic activities, management of challenging 
behaviors, end of life issues and caring for caregivers. Pre, post, and 3 
month post-post tests were administered (n=110). ANOVA results showed 
significant increases (p=.001) in knowledge and attitudes. As a result of 
training, > 500 professional and family caregivers have received inservices 
and community education programs. This model, used as a Gerontological nursing 
intervention, can increase knowledge and improve attitudes of nurses working 
with individuals who have dementia.


\\\\\
Intervention by Advanced Practice Nurses to East the Transition to the Nursing 
Home

Mariah Snyder, Muriel B. Ryden, Kathie Krichbaum, Christine Heine, Val 
Pearson, and Judy Hanscom

Admission to a nursing home is a life event that commonly is dreaded by 
elders. Institutionalization usually is necessitated by cumulative losses that 
put the individual at risk for depression. The study reported here is part of 
a four year project funded by NINR to determine the effect of the 
implementation of research-based protocols by advanced practice nurses (APNs) 
on resident outcomes and fiscal outcomes related to selected clinical 
problems, one of which is depression. Using the AHCPR guidelines for 
depression, a protocol was developed to assess for level of depression or 
level of risk and then treat appropriately. Subjects (a target of 36 at each 
facility) are residents newly admitted to three comparable nursing homes: two 
treatment and one control condition. Although we anticipated that a subset of 
subjects would be assessed as depressed, we believed that all newly admitted 
residents are, at a minimum, at risk for depression. Therefore, in addition to 
the standardized protocol for depression, we developed a comprehensive 
structured interview to be administered by the APN to obtain information which 
the literature suggests might be relevant to adjustment. An intervention 
protocol, "Transition to the Nursing Home", was developed for APNs to 
individualize and then implement with each resident subject. The following 
instruments are being administered to all three groups of subjects at 
admission, 14 weeks, and 26 weeks: Geriatric Depression Scale, Philadelphia 
Geriatric Center Morale Scale, and Apparent Emotion Scale. The Satisfaction 
With the Nursing Home Scale is administered at two and six months. The 
interview and protocol will be described. The findings and the implications 
will be discussed.


\\\\\
Emergence: The Sacrificial Concept on the Alter of Mainstream Acceptability

Marsha H. Cohen

The assumptions of the naturalistic paradigm are appealing to many nurse 
researchers since they are most congruent with the professed values of the 
profession. Operationalized, these assumptions have yielded a wide variety of 
methodologies. Among these, grounded theory has recently been identified as, 
perhaps, the most commonly used interpretive strategy in the social sciences 
today (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994) and an unprecedented number of nursing studies 
that purport to have used grounded theory have been published during the past 
4 years. However, the capacity of researchers to discover significant, 
meaningful theory has been seriously diminished by the persistent and 
pervasive use of the dominant paradigm as the frame of reference to judge the 
merit of a proposed study. Established and new researchers alike have felt 
pressured to violate the concept of emergence in their proposals in exchange 
for enhanced funding opportunities or the timely and successful defense of 
their dissertation. This paper will discuss the concept of emergency and argue 
that it is the concept most critical to the scholarly conduct of every phase 
of grounded theory research and to the significance of the theory that is 
generated. Examples of how and why emergence is so often sacrificed will be 
explored along with strategies that may serve to reverse this 
counterproductive trend.


\\\\\
The Interpretive Trail: Judging the Worth of Qualitative Research

Sharon L. Sims and Linda E. Musser

Judging the adequacy, quality, and worth of interpretive research continues to 
be problematic for scholars, editors, and funding agencies. While earlier 
attempts at establishing standards to evaluation have been useful, the 
standards produced have been limiting and often confusing. It has been 
difficult to move away from the language and intent of standards for 
evaluating experimental research. Even the most well-known sets of criteria 
seem quite analogous to ideas of reliability and validity. This paper proposes 
to move beyond this attachment and to begin construction of criteria that 
better reflect the spirit and philosophical basis of interpretive research. 
Concepts such as authenticity (core, theoretical, and philosophical), topical 
presence, participant affirmation and amplification, the interpretive trail, 
education of essences, and thematic congruence are described. This flexible 
and relational set of processes allows us to judge interpretive work in a more 
meaningful way.


\\\\\
Determining the Relevance of Self-Care Nursing Theory for Diverse Cultural 
Populations

Marjorie A. Isenberg

This paper focuses on cross-national nursing research designed to determine 
the relevance of Orem's Self-Care Nursing theory in advancing knowledge for 
diverse cultural populations. The research presented here represents the 
collaborative effort of nurse-scientists from Belgium, Canada, Denmark, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand, and the USA. Elements 
of the collaborative research program included in the paper are: (1) 
Validating propositions of Self-Care Nursing Theory with cross-cultural 
research populations; (2) Testing the validity and reliability of translated 
research instruments designed to measure self-care concepts; (3) 
Cross-national comparisons of research findings. The findings of the 
comparative studies identify universal elements of the Self-Care Nursing 
Theory. Moreover, the research results illustrate the benefits of 
collaborative nursing research in determining the global relevance of nursing 
theories for advancing nursing knowledge for the multicultural global 
community.


\\\\\
Ethnicity Within Orem's General Theory of Nursing: A Theoretical Analysis and 
Research Example

Nancy O'Connor

In this paper, the contribution of Orem's General Theory of Nursing (GTN) to 
the understanding of sociocultural orientation as a factor which influences 
patient and nurse variables in the health care setting will be explored in a 
general theoretical sense. In addition, findings from a survey of 616 adults 
ages 19 through 70 who receive ambulatory health care from nurse practitioners 
will be reported as they relate to ethnicity as a predictor of specific sets 
of self-care capabilities. The sample was ethnically diverse with African, 
European, and Asian-Americans the predominant ethnic backgrounds reported. 
Findings demonstrated that ethnicity was a significant predictor of the 
foundational dispositions of self-care agency, but not of the power to perform 
the productive operations of self-care agency, using multiple regression 
techniques. Implications will be discussed in relation to the adequacy of the 
theory to describe and explain the importance of sociocultural variation in 
self-care research. Points of articulation between the theory and selected 
psychological theories of ethnic identity will be examined.


\\\\\
Examining the Relevance of Modeling and Role-Modeling Theory and Paradigm 
Constructs for African American, Caucasian and Hispanic Adult High School 
Dropouts

Janet S. Barnfather

Adult high school dropouts are an underserved and virtually overlooked 
population at risk for unhealthy, unproductive lives. School nurses have 
recognized this at-risk population and are interested in examining 
community-based interventions that bridge the practice-research-theory gap. A 
school nurse practicing in an adult Career Education Center for adult high 
school dropouts conducted a study using major constructs from the Modeling and 
Role-Modeling (MRM) theory and paradigm. Specifically, this study examines 
three MRM constructs, psychosocial development, basic needs and adaptive 
potential. A convenience sample of African American (n=126), Caucasian (n=47) 
and Hispanic (n=11) adult high school dropouts at the Center completed 
self-report questionnaires which were designed to measure the identified MRM 
constructs. Although psychometric testing of these instruments has been 
reported in the empirical literature, there is a lack of testing for validity 
and reliability cross-culturally. The results of psychometric testing will be 
reported for students at the Center by culture/ethnic group. Subgroups within 
these groups will be examined related to identified MRM constructs. School 
nurses will use the results from this study to tailor a program of 
community-based interventions that facilitate culturally competent care.


\\\\\
Explanatory Models of Illness Among Japanese

Mineko Yamashita

This study examined patients' understanding and responses to chronic illnesses 
in Japan. Two major research questions posed were: what explanatory models are 
used to describe chronic illnesses among Japanese? and what self-care 
practices of Japanese are engaged in during illness episodes? Explanatory 
models of illness delineated by Kleinman (1978, 1980) were the theoretical 
underpinning of this investigation. The methodological strategy applied was 
in-depth interviewing based on eight questions identified in Patient's Model 
(Kleinman, 1978, p. 256). Findings from the study were analyzed by 
quantitative and qualitative methods. The findings from this study have 
implications not only for local care providers in Japan but also for 
cosmopolitan care providers outside Japan. As well, self-care practices 
identified from this study may contribute towards the testing of Kleinman's 
theory, as well as Orem's (1983) Self-Care Deficit Theory in particular, since 
Orem's (1980) model indicates that self-care practices are culturally 
determined.


\\\\\
Adherence to Standards of Care and Implications of Body Temperature 
Measurement in Trauma Patients

Wendy Sue Shreve

Trauma patients are at great risk for hypothermia and many treatment 
procedures in trauma care accentuate heat loss. Because of the potential 
dangers of hypothermia, it is essential to monitor the body temperature. The 
purposes of this study were 1) to identify the level of adherence to the 
standard that all trauma patients have body temperature recorded in the 
emergency department, 2) to describe the range of body temperature 
measurements recorded, 3) to identify the incidence of hypothermia and 4) to 
determine if a relationship exists between body temperature and injury 
severity. Orem's concept of nurse agency provided the theoretical basis for 
this study, a retrospective medical record review. A convenience sample of 60 
trauma patients was selected at a Level I trauma center. A 40% level of 
adherence to the standard for temperature measurement was found. Temperatures 
ranged from 87 degrees to 100.6 degrees Fahrenheit, and 33% of the patients 
were hypothermic (< 96.6 degrees Fahrenheit). A significant inverse 
relationship was found between body temperature and injury severity (r=-.46, p 
- .02). Findings from this research provide a basis for intervention studies 
and the impetus for educational programs to address the complication of 
hypothermia in this population.


\\\\\
A Comparison of the Level of Hope in Newly Diagnosed Cancer Patients and 
Patients with Recurrent Cancer

Angela Ballard, Teresa Green, and Aimee McCaa

Hope has long been recognized as a necessary component for a good quality of 
life. Even in the face of life threatening disease, such as cancer, hope has 
been found to sustain individuals through cancer diagnosis, treatment, and/or 
recurrence. Expectations were that levels of hope would decrease with 
recurrence of cancer, and that females and married individuals would have more 
hope. Oncology physician practices in two urban areas of the southern United 
States were utilized to recruit a convenience sample of 38 cancer patients. 
Subjects completed the Herth Hope Scale, a 30 item four point likert tool. 
Following the completion of the HHS, subjects were asked to respond to an 
open-ended question, "What is giving you the most hope at this present time?". 
For this study the reliability of the HHS was .8334. The internal consistency 
for each factor follows: Factor I (Temporality and Future) a=.6921, Factor II 
(Positive Readiness and Expectancy) a=.5589, and Factor III 
(Interconnectedness) a=.6291. On average, the sample was Caucasian (89.5%), 56 
years of age (SD=13.55), female (68.4%), married (68.5%), and had a high 
school degree or GED (36.8%). A religious affiliation was reported by (89.5%) 
of the sample subjects. Contrary to expectations, newly diagnosed and 
recurrent cancer patients did not differ as to the level of hope experienced. 
However, significant differences were found in the type of hope utilized by 
cancer patients (F (72,2) = 16.71, p = .00). Married cancer patients and males 
both experienced higher levels of hope. From the open-ended question 
concerning hope at present time, recurrent themes were: family support, 
non-family support, faith, outlook, and health professionals/care. Although 
the results of this study are preliminary, nurses need to be aware that newly 
diagnosed cancer patients look to health care professionals, and their 
treatments for hope and support.


\\\\\
A Descriptive Study of Factors Associated with Late Stage at Diagnosis of 
Breast Cancer Among Women in Ohio

Rosemary V. Chaudry

Breast cancer accounts for approximately 32% of total cancer incidence and 
approximately 19% of total cancer deaths among women in Ohio. Because 
mortality from breast cancer is associated with stage at diagnosis, public 
health efforts are focused on secondary preventive interventions for early 
detection. The purpose of this study is to identify groups of women at high 
risk for under-use of screening mammography by examining the relationships 
between distribution of stage at diagnosis of breast cancer and correlates of 
screening mammography utilization, using the distribution of stage at 
diagnosis as a surrogate measure of screening mammography utilization. The 
Behavioral Model of Health Services Utilization guided the selection of 
variables. Data sources include a population-based statewide tumor registry of 
incident breast cancer cases (N=7018) census data, and health system data. 
Hierarchical regression analysis and discriminant analysis will be used to 
identify groups of women at high risk for advanced stage at diagnosis of 
breast cancer. Study results may be used by public health nurses for 
assessment of community health status and for targeting resources to high-risk 
groups of women.


\\\\\
An Examination of Demographic Characteristics and Mental Health Status Among 
Southeast Asian Refugee Women

Mayumi Anne Willgerodt

To date, research on the needs of Southeast Asian (SEA) refugees has focused 
mainly on men and has not been gender specific. Despite evidence that SEA 
Women are at higher risk for depression, present studies have not adequately 
explored the variables that may be associated with mental health problems in 
this group. The Stressful Life Events Model was used as the conceptual 
framework to guide a secondary analysis of an existing data base to: 1) 
describe the characteristics of age, ethnicity, marital status, length of 
residence in the US, education, occupational change, and religion pre- and 
post migration, and 2) explore the relationships between those variables and 
mental health status. Data on a sample of 169 Cambodian, Vietnamese, and 
Laotian women recruited via an urban public school system were analyzed. 
Mental health was measured utilizing the Hopkins Symptom Checklist 25 (HSCL) 
which has established validity and reliability in this population. 
Characteristics of this sample are described using measures of central 
tendency and comparison of means. Correlations and one-way analyses of 
variance demonstrated a significant positive relationship between length of 
residence and mean HSCL scores whereas a significant negative relationship was 
found between education and mean HSCL scores. An examination of the 
relationship of mean mental health status scores indicated that marital 
status, religion, and occupational change were important mediators of stress 
in mental health. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to identify the 
unique contribution of those variables to the variance in depression; 
ethnicity, education, and social support defined as marital status and 
religious affiliation. These variables accounted for approximately 40% of the 
variance in this study. The findings will be useful for future research and 
practice with refugee women.


\\\\\
An Instrument to Measure Attentional Demands

Debra A. Jansen

According to Kaplan and Kaplan's theory of attention, excessive demand for 
attention produces a reduced capacity to direct attention and thus difficulty 
in managing everyday activities. The purposes of this study were to identify 
attentional demands for health elderly and to develop a closed-ended 
instrument to measure them. Thirty (22 males, 8 females) community dwelling 
elderly (ages 66-87 years; M=77) were interviewed to ascertain their 
perceptions of demands in four theoretically derived domains. For the physical 
environmental domain, the elderly identified external demands such as the 
weather, lighting, and noise as interfering with their daily lives. Examples 
of informational demands or factors that interfere with perception and 
interpretation were facing new situations due to moving and the loss of a 
spouse, and vision and hearing difficulties. For behavioral demands, or 
biophysical and situational factors that interfere wit inclinations, examples 
were tedious tasks such as exercising and cooking, as well as not driving, 
financial restrictions, and loss of physical stamina. Examples of affective 
demands or feelings that preoccupy and distract were loneliness and worries 
and sadness about their own health and future. A content analysis of the 
interview data produced items for the Attentional Demands Survey (ADS). A 
report of the validity and reliability along with a factor analysis of the ADS 
data will be provided. The ADS will be used in future interventions aimed at 
decreasing demands and restoring attention in the elderly.


\\\\\
A Philosophical Inquiry of Orem's General Theory of Nursing

Barbara Banfield

The purpose of this study is to investigate the philosophical foundations of 
Orem's Self Care Deficit Theory of Nursing (SCDTN) through the use of 
philosophical inquiry. The research questions pertain to the metaphysical 
position of Orem's SCDTN regarding the nature of human beings as well as to 
the appropriateness of existing research methods for the development of 
knowledge related to Orem's SCDTN.

The inquiry's conceptualization is based on Lauden's views of science and 
Orem's views of nursing as a practical science.

This philosophical inquiry is primarily of the argumentation by analysis form. 
This approach involves the critical examination and analysis of literature in 
order to explicate philosophical underpinnings and assumptions, to clarify 
meanings, and to identify inconsistencies. The literature examined in this 
study includes the writings of Orem and those authors whom she has identified 
as influencing her thinking as well as the literature pertaining to the 
philosophical foundations of various research methods. The findings of the 
study will be subjected to appropriate evaluation criteria.

The findings from this philosophical inquiry will represent scientific 
progress related to Orem's SCDTN through the explication of Orem's position 
regarding the nature of human beings and through the identification of 
research methods appropriate for knowledge development related to this model. 
This will provide a foundation for further development of the SCDTN as well as 
provide direction for research studies designed to generate knowledge related 
to the SCDTN.


\\\\\
A Study of the Relationship Between Registered Nurses Time Spent in Direct 
Care Activities, Nursing Skill Mix and Patient Perceptions of Nurse Caring

Jeanne L. Roode

There is a need for nurse administrators to understand how the use of nursing 
resources impacts the quality of patient care. A descriptional correlational 
research design was used to examine the relationship between RN time spent in 
direct care activities, nursing skill mix and patient perceptions of nurse 
caring. A secondary analysis was conducted using data previously collected as 
part of a large-scale data set from a 529 bed community teaching hospital. The 
data consisted of 76,491 activity samples obtained through work sampling of 16 
nursing units, 2 categories of unit skill mix measurements, and a Caring 
Behaviors Inventory completed by 313 patients. A significantly positive 
relationship was found between the percentage of time RNs spent in direct care 
activities and patient perceptions of nurse caring (r=.6874, p<.01). A 
significantly positive relationship was also found between the percentage of 
RNs in the skill mix and patient perceptions of nurse caring (r=.50, p<.05).


\\\\\
Appraisal, Hardiness, and Self-Care Power in Oncology Spouse Caregivers

Melody L. McKinney

Spouses of cancer patients are a population at risk for stress-related 
illness. A contributing factor may be difficulty in meeting their own in 
self-care needs. Lazarus' and Folkman's cognitive appraisal theory of stress 
and coping (1984) and Orem's (1991) conceptualization of the power components 
of self-care agency were used to explore the influence of appraisal and 
hardiness on the caregiver's power to engage in self-care. Self-report 
questionnaires were given to 21 spouses from two outpatient cancer centers and 
a hospice homecare agency. Subjects completed Oberst's Appraisal of Caregiving 
Scale, Pollock's Health-Related Hardiness Scale, and the researcher developed, 
Power of Self-Care Scale. Current internal consistency reliabilities for the 
three scales ranged from .62-.97. Using a descriptive, correlational design, 
self-care power was found to be related to benign appraisal (r=.55, p<.05), 
but not to threat appraisal, hardiness, or any personal and situational 
characteristics. Benign appraisal was additionally found to be related to 
threat appraisal (r=.69, p<.001), hardiness (r=.64, p<.01), and caregiver 
disability (r=-.57, p<.01). Findings from multiple regression analysis; after 
controlling for the effect of caregiver disability, revealed benign appraisal 
be a significant predictor (Beta=.72, p=<.01) of self-care power, with 34% of 
the variance accounted for by the regression evaluation (p=.01). Findings 
support the cognitive appraisal model of stress and coping. Caregivers who 
perceived their situations as nonstressful (benign) had greater self-care 
power. Caregivers who perceived their situations as more benign and less 
threatening reported greater hardiness. Data suggest that interventions 
designed to modify the caregiver's stress perception may enhance perceived 
hardiness in the caregiver and strengthen his or her power for self-care.

\\\\\
Attitudes of Nurses Toward Adult Patients with Excessive Adiposity

Marjorie J. Culbertson

The purpose of this descriptive survey was to examine attitudes of registered 
nurses toward the personalities and lifestyles of obese adult patients and the 
management of their care. Symbolic interaction theory forms the framework for 
this study along wit integration of the concepts of attitude and obesity. 
Seventy-three registered nurses from a baccalaureate and a master of science 
in nursing program in northwestern Ohio participated in this study. Data were 
collected via two questionnaires and analyzed using descriptive and 
inferential statistics. Findings revealed a strongly positive and 
statistically significant linear correlation (r=.72, p=.000) between nurses' 
attitudes toward personalities and lifestyles of obese patients and their 
attitudes toward management of their care. Registered nurses need to do a self 
assessment of the attitudes they possess toward obese adults, since these 
attitudes may influence the quality of care for obese patients.


\\\\\
Autonomic Reactivity in Nonorganic Failure to Thrive Infants

Deborah Steward

Nonorganic failure to thrive (NOFTT) is a significant problem facing nurses 
caring for infants. NOFTT accounts for 10% of all children seen in an 
outpatient setting. Even after NOFTT is resolved, infants are at high risk for 
long-term adverse effects such as developmental delay, cognitive deficits, 
behavioral disorders, and poor growth. Prior research has focused on the 
mother's contribution to NOFTT. Specifically and using a using a 
psychobiological framework, reactivity of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) 
and behavioral characteristics of the infant may play a role. The specific aim 
of this study is to examine differences between ANS tone and behavioral 
characteristics in NOFTT and normal infants. Using a case-control descriptive, 
comparative design, infants with NOFTT will be matched by age and sex with 
infants who have a normal growth trajector. Using chi-square and t-test, 
infants with NOFTT will be compared to normal infants using the following 
data: 1) ANS tone as assessed by heart rate variability measured by spectral 
analysis, Poincare plots, and standard deviation and 2) behavioral 
characteristics as assessed by the Infant Characteristics Questionnaire. In 
addition, using Spearman-rho and Pearson's correlations, the relationship 
between measures of heart rate variability and infant behaviors will be 
determined. The findings from this study may provide evidence of underlying 
physiologic processes contributing to the abnormal behavioral reactivity in 
NOFTT infants.


\\\\\
The Care and Treatment Progression of Bone Marrow Transplant Patients with 
Breast Cancer

Lisa L. Berta

The purpose of this study was to describe events in the care and treatment 
progression of patients undergoing an Adult Autologous Bone Morrow Transplant 
(ABMT) or Peripheral Stem Cell Transplant (PSCT) for breast cancer. Due to the 
lack of nursing literature concerning the disease and treatment events with 
ABMT, there is a necessity to study these conditions. The setting was a five-
bed bone marrow transplant unit in a Midwestern teaching hospital. Roy's 
adaptation theory was used to frame the study. A retrospective review of 16 
medical records and Southwest Oncology Group Toxicity Records, was done. The 
incidence, timing, and severity (1=low, 4=high) of nausea and vomiting, use of 
blood products, neutropenia,and stomatitis were analyzed. Neutropenia was 
experienced by 100% of the patients in the sample for a duration of 10 to 26 
days. All patients reached a severity grade of four for neutropenia. 
Stomatitis occurred in nine patients (56.3%). Only three patients reached a 
severity grade of three. All 16 patients experienced nausea and vomiting. 
Those patients with one onset and extended durations also had the highest 
severity levels. Nine patients did require TNP for nutritional support. The 
use of PRCBs (mean number of transfusion 2.75) occurred less frequently than 
the use of platelets (mean number of transfusions 5.13). Day +4 was 
significant for both blood and platelet use. A critical pathway has been 
developed incorporating the results from this research which will help 
standardize the care of ABMIT patients with breast cancer.


\\\\\
Cluster Analysis Replication of Variables in Highly Tempting and Slip Episodes 
of Individuals Attempting-Smoking Cessation

Monica Scheibmeir

Prior research on variables in highly tempting smoking situations using 
cluster analysis had supported a four cluster solution. A secondary data 
analysis was conducted to attempt replication of the cluster classification of 
variables in highly tempting and slip episodes of individuals attempting to 
quit smoking. Interviews from 66 subjects were used for the analysis. A 
modified version of Shiffman's coding scheme of situational variables was used 
to code the data. A hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward's method was 
performed followed by a K-means cluster analysis. A two cluster solution was 
obtained. The first cluster was labeled negative-stressful and the second 
cluster was labeled positive-social. A Chi-square test revealed that neither 
cluster was able to predict the outcome of the smoking crisis situation. 
Variations in sample size and setting may account for some of the difference 
between the two studies. Implications for cognitive and behavioral coping 
strategies are discussed.


\\\\\
Co-Regulation of VLBW Infant Feeding: Mothers' Working Models of Feeding

Suzanne M. Thoyre

Co-regulation is the process by which infants and their caregivers negotiate 
the activity of feeding (Fogel, 1993). Understanding co-regulation from the 
parent's perspective can guide nurses as they support the development of 
parent's feeding practices with their VLBW infants. Co-regulation includes 
features of active participation, goal orientation (i.e., regulation) and 
relationship with another. Both caregivers' working models of feeding and 
their feeding skills and infants' regulatory capacities and their feeding 
skills constrain the process of co-regulated feeding. The purpose of this 
study is to explore how mothers view the process of very low birthweight 
(VLBW) infant feeding and how they describe being with their infants during 
feeding. Twenty-five VLBW infants and their mothers were video-taped during a 
feeding prior to discharge from the NICU. Following the feeding, mothers were 
interviewed using The Joint Exploration of Parent's Working Model of Feeding 
(Pridham, 1995) and interviews were coded on a six-point scale using Pridham's 
method of examining working models of feeding (Pridham, Schroeder, Van Riper, 
Thoyre, Oleson & Mlynarczyk, 1995). Coded dimensions of co-regulation include: 
(a) how the mother views the infant's and her own participation in the 
feeding; (b) the extent to which the mother shares responsibility for the 
feeding process and outcome with the infant; (c) the support the mother 
describes the infant needs and the extent to which the mother aims to support 
her infant in becoming a fuller participant in the feeding process; and (d) 
how the mother views the relationship she is developing with her infant as 
having regulator functions. Transcribed interview quotes will be used to 
elaborate the definition of co-regulation, to illustrate the rating scale, and 
to share how co-regulation is characterized in mothers' working models of 
feeding. Implications for practice and future research will be explored.

\\\\\
Comparison of Two Solutions for Capping Peripheral Intravenous Lines in 
Infants

Sharon M. Graves

Many adult hospitals use normal saline for capping peripheral IV's as their 
standard practice. However, as with many aspects of care it cannot be assumed 
that this information was immediately transferable to children. The purpose of 
this study was to compare normal saline versus heparin solution to maintain 
patency of capped peripheral IVs in infants less than one year of age, 
including premature infants, with a 24 gauge catheter. The research questions 
were: 1. Is there a difference in length of duration between IVs that were 
capped with normal saline versus heparin? 2. Is there a difference between 
IV's capped with normal saline versus heparin in the incidence of phlebitis, 
clotting or infiltration? 3. Is there a differential effect of site of IV, 
patient weight types of medications, blood/blood products administration, 
capped with normal saline versus heparin? 4. Is there a difference in the cost 
of medication between the two solutions? The subjects were 31 preterm and full 
term infants. This is an experimental blinded study. A Pearson chi-square 
analysis compared the differences in clotting, infiltration or the incidence 
of phlebitis. Cross tabulations and frequency distributions were used to 
examine the variable of weight, type of medication or blood product infused an 
site placement. The first three hypotheses were supported. The 4th hypothesis 
was not supported.


\\\\\
The Construction and Validation of the Developmental Scale of Sexual Risk-
Taking

DeAnn L. Ambroson

This cross-sectional exploratory study reports on the development of an 
instrument to measure college students' sexual behaviors, attitudes, 
perceptions of susceptibility to infection with HIV, and the influence of 
psychosocial developmental level on these variables. A convenience sample of 
422 undergraduate and graduate students was used to test the instrument. 
Aspects of Chickering's Theory of College Student Development meshed with 
Rosenstock's Health Belief Model provided the theoretical framework for the 
study. Factor analysis was used to identify four underlying developmental 
factors and four underlying sexual factors. Cronbach's Alpha ranged from.5 to 
.9 for these factors. The research hypothesis states that college students in 
earlier levels of development would tend to engage in high-risk sexual 
behavior more frequently but would be less likely to assess their behavior as 
increasing their susceptibility to infection with HIV than students who were 
more developmentally advanced. The hypothesis was tested using multiple 
regression analyses. The results of these analyses supported the research 
hypothesis that developmental level impacted sexual behaviors and perceptions 
of susceptibility to AIDS.


\\\\\
Critical Care Nurses' Knowledge of Pressure Ulcer Prevention, Staging, and 
Would Description

Jacalynn C. Mattern

The purpose of this study was to ascertain critical care (CC) nurses' 
knowledge of pressure ulcer prevention, staging, and description in reference 
to the AHCPR guideline on pressure ulcer prediction and prevention. King's 
conceptual framework and content related to pressure ulcer prevention guided 
the study. A cross-section survey design was used to collect data from 98 
medical-surgical (MS) nurses and 75 CC nurses. The Pressure Ulcer Knowledge 
Test (PUKT) consisted of 47 True/False items and had a reliability of .68 by 
Cronbach's alpha. Items were hand sorted into Prevention (33 items), Staging 
(7 items), and Wound (7 items) subscores. The total PUKT and subscores did not 
differ significantly between the CC and MS nurses. CC nurses' knowledge was 
not affected by when these nurses had heard a lecture or read an article about 
pressure ulcers except CC nurses Wound subscore was significantly higher the 
more recently they had heard a lecture about pressure ulcers, F(2,72)=3.53, 
p=.03. The percentage of items answered correctly on the PUKT by CC nurses 
ranged from 15% to 83%. Only 13% of CC nurses had read the AHCPR guideline on 
prevention. This study revealed a knowledge deficit about pressure ulcer 
prevention information among CC nurses. Deficiencies in nurses' knowledge may 
be documented by testing and educational programs need to be developed to 
correct these learning needs. Since pressure ulcers have been identified as a 
national health care concern and since nurses have a primary role in pressure 
ulcer prevention, research addressing nurses' knowledge about pressure ulcers 
is relevant.


\\\\\
Development and Features of Nurse Shared Governance

Janet K. Pringle Specht

Shared governance is one innovation used to restructure health care 
organizations to promote the work of professionals and attain the goals of the 
organization. Nurse shared governance is a practice model that defines a 
partnership between professional nurses and organization managers for 
authority and accountability for nursing care. Implementation of the features 
of shared nurse governance requires major changes and is developmental, often 
taking five years or more to get the features of the model in place and 
professional nurses comfortable with their role changes.

A cross-sectional survey design was used to compare the type and number of 
features of shared governance on hospital inpatient units where nurse shared 
governance has been implemented for 0, 3 to 7, and 10 or more years. The 
convenience sample used was comprised of 2 hospitals having no shared 
governance, 2 hospitals with shared governance implemented from 3 to 7 years, 
and 2 hospitals with shared governance for 10 or more years. Data was 
collected from 3 samples: inpatient care units (5 from each hospital), staff 
nurses (25 from each unit), and patients (25 from each unit). Nurses and 
patients were mailed a structured response format questionnaire to collect 
both unit and individual information.

The study compared the relationships among the levels of perceived nurse 
autonomy and accountability, years of development of shared nurse governance, 
and numbers of features of shared nurse governance with nurse job satisfaction 
and patient satisfaction. Data were analyzed at the patient unit level with 
aggregated nurse and patient data using correlation, regression, and path 
analysis.


\\\\\
Diabetes Education: Does the Content Affect Patient Outcomes

Ruth M. Borthwick

Educating a patient with diabetes is an inherent part in the treatment and 
management of this chronic disease. Diabetic researchers encourage patient 
educators to incorporate the concept of self-care into their educational 
intervention to provide patients with the tools they need to manage their 
disease. This led to the hypothesis: Patients exposed to self-care content 
during their diabetic education will have a greater weight loss and lower 
hemoglobin A1c levels than patients attending programs not incorporating this 
content. The concept of self-care is clearly identified in Dorthea Orem's 
theory of self-care deficit. She supported the concept that individuals have 
an inherent ability to manage their health. Along with her theory, Bandura's 
concept of self-efficacy served as the theoretical framework for this study.

A quasi-experimental retrospective pre-test/posttest design was utilized. The 
purpose of the study was to determine if there was a difference in patient 
outcomes based on the content the patient received during his diabetic 
education. Patients attending three ADA approved diabetic education programs 
served as the population for the study. Only one of the education programs 
incorporated self-care information in their curriculum. Following a nine month 
ex-post facto collection of data, changes in weight and hemoglobin A1c were 
analyzed utilizing the analysis of covariance to determine the differences 
among patient attending the three educational programs. The analysis supported 
the hypothesis in relation to the hemoglobin A1c, but not in relation the 
weight loss.


\\\\\
Does Contraction of Pelvic Floor Preparatory to a Cough Reduce Urine Leakage 
in Stress Incontinent Women?

Janis M. Miller

Healthy pelvic floor muscles (PFM), reacting to physical stressors such as a 
cough, provide a solid floor of support under the urethra. While numerous 
studies report the effects of PFM exercise as a therapeutic modality for 
stress incontinence, no studies could be found that report the effects of 
volitional control within an actual activity that precipitates leakage. The 
purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of PFM "knack" (contracting 
the PFM muscles simultaneously with a cough regardless of PFM strength) on 
urine leakage. The sample consists of 20 women age > 60. A simple test of 
leakage was developed- namely to hold a paper towel under the urethra during 
cough with a full bladder and repeat with PFM contracted. The amount of 
leakage is quantified by measuring the major and minor diameters of the wet 
spot on the towel. Preliminary results (N=10): For a medium cough reduction in 
leakage with cocontraction of PFM averaged 95% over no cocontraction (P=0.02, 
paired-t). For a deep cough, the corresponding change was a 70% reduction in 
leakage (P=0.04). Findings have significance for the approximately 33% of 
women who leak urine.


\\\\\
Effectiveness of an Education Program on Reduction of Physical Restraint Use 
for the Elderly

Sally J. Muich

The issue of restraint use and the elderly continues to be one of great 
concern. The purpose of the study was to determine the effectiveness of a 
formal education program as an intervention for restraint reduction in the 
care of the elderly. Lewin's theory of change and Knowles' androgogical model 
of adult learning formed the theoretical basis for this study. A convenience 
sample of 30 nursing staff members from a metropolitan hospital-based skilled 
nursing facility participated. A pro post test design was used. Participants 
attended three educational sessions which focused on restraint reduction. The 
post-test was given at the end of the third session. A chart review of 110 
charts from the skilled unit was conducted to determine the incidence of 
restraint use prior to and after the education sessions. Data were analyzed 
using descriptive statistics, & binomial version of the McNemar test - a 
Pearson Correlation coefficient. The results allowed a significant improvement 
in the test scores for knowledge and beliefs (p<.001). A significant 
correlation was found in the relationship of knowledge and beliefs. The data 
from the chart review showed a decrease in the use of restraints with an 
increase in the use of alternatives. The results indicate the importance of 
education in the effort to reduce restraint use and provide alternatives.


\\\\\
The Effect of Anticipatory Guidance on the Development of Stomatitis in 
Chemotherapy Patients

Lisa A. Davis

Stomatitis is one of the major side effects reported by cancer patients 
undergoing chemotherapy. The conceptual framework for this study is 
anticipatory guidance. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether 
anticipatory guidance in a specific mouth care regimen leads to less severe 
stomatitis. A convenience sample of 28 cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy 
were assigned by a toss of the coin method to either the experimental or 
control group. The experimental group received anticipatory guidance as well 
as supplies, and the control group did not. Degree of stomatitis was measured 
10-14 days after intervention both subjectively using the Modified McMaster 
University Questionnaire and objectively by the Western Consortium for Cancer 
Nursing Research Staging System for Stomatitis. Analysis revealed no 
difference in the two groups with regard to incidence or degree of stomatitis, 
but incidence was 7 (44%) in the control group as compared to 3 (25%) in the 
experimental. This has clinical significance. The results of this study is of 
interest to nursing because many times patients report dropping out of 
chemotherapy treatment because of the intolerable side effects.


\\\\\
Effects of Postoperative Teaching Interventions on Pain Rating and Patient 
Satisfaction with Pain Management

Joanne R. Rowles, D. J. Jones, and D. F. Degner

The purposes of this experimental study were to test the effects of 
preoperative and discharge teaching interventions on postoperative pain 
measured by the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) and to determine patient 
satisfaction with pain management, measured by the Pain Management 
Satisfaction Scale (PMSS) in a sample of selected orthopedic and neurologic 
patients (n=106). Subjects were assigned to one of four intervention groups 
receiving either preoperative teaching, both preoperative and discharge 
teaching, or no teaching. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine 
differences in pain scores (NRS scores) and PMSS scores at during 
hospitalization, and at 3 and 6 weeks post discharge for each of the 4 
intervention groups. For the orthopedic patients (n=65) significant group 
differences were reported for pain rating scores on postoperative day 1 
(F[3,63 df] = 3.39, p < .05) and postoperative day 3 (F [3,61 df] = 4.75, p < 
.01) of hospitalization, and post hoc Tukeys revealed that scores were higher 
on both day for the preoperative teaching group compared to the other groups. 
In regard to patient satisfaction, significant differences on PMSS scores 
occurred at 3 weeks post discharge (F [6,160 df] = 3.39, p < .01) and Tukeys 
showed differences between the preoperative (M=2.77) and discharge teaching 
groups (M=3.03) and the preoperative group and no teaching group (M==3.17). In 
addition, similar findings were reported at 6 weeks post discharge. These 
findings indicate the need to further explore the influences of patient 
teaching on postoperative pain and patient satisfaction.


\\\\\
Effects of Quality of Life on Treatment Decisions in Patients Receiving 
Chemotherapy

Tina M. Nink

Quality of life research has gained enormous interest in the past decade. The 
purpose of this literature review is to examine research aimed at addressing: 
What is the relationship between perceived quality of life and the decision to 
initiate and continue chemotherapeutic treatment in the adult cancer 
population? Using Parses' (1981) theory of Man-Living-Health as a guide for 
this review, research directed toward exploring relationships between quality 
of life and chemotherapeutic treatment decisions have been selected. 
Literature suggests that a relationship does exist between subjectively 
perceived quality of life and the decisions regarding chemotherapeutic 
treatment. There appears to be agreement among researchers that factors which 
negatively affect quality of life result in decisions to discontinue treatment 
emerges as the leading negative effect on quality of life resulting in these 
decisions. Implications for nursing practice include quality of life 
assessments prior to, and throughout the treatment process; patient education 
regarding potential side effects of treatment; prior to, and throughout the 
treatment process; patient education regarding potential side effects of 
treatment; continuous assessment of side effects of treatment and the 
underlying disease process; interventions aimed at reducing and alleviating 
negative effects of treatment and the disease process, thus minimizing the 
adverse effect on perceived quality of life, which may result in potential 
loss of cure and possibly death. Suggestions for future research are also 
discussed.


\\\\\
The Effect of Glycopyrrolate Premedication on Postoperative Sore Throat

Patricia Stratelak, W. White, and D. Wenzel

Problem: Most patients given general anesthesia require endotracheal 
intubation. Most of the literature indicates that > 40% experience a sore 
throat or hoarseness. Research has demonstrated this pain can be more severe 
than incisional pain.

Purpose: To compare the incidence and severity of postoperative sore throats 
in surgical patients receiving and not receiving glycopyrrolate as part of 
their preoperative medication.

Sample: A convenience sample procedure yielded 198 consenting patients between 
the ages of 18-65 (x=37, 78% female), classified as ASA I or II, who were 
undergoing elective, non-ear/nose/throat surgery at a midwestern, suburban 
community hospital.

Method: Patients were assigned randomly to receive a preoperative injection of 
meperidine 50-75 mg, hydroxyzine 50 mg and glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg, (Group 1) or 
similar doses of meperidine and hydroxyzine without glycopyrrolate (Group 2). 
Twenty to 30 hours postoperatively, a trained RN interviewer, blind to the 
subject's treatment status, administered the Loeser instrument to determine 
the presence of a sore throat and its severity.

Results: Postoperative sore throat incidence was significantly higher 
(Chi-square; P<0.05) in Group 1. Of the patients who did complain of a 
postoperative sore throat, those who received glycopyrrolate had significantly 
(Mann-Whitney U Test; P<0.05) greater throat pain than the patients who did 
not receive glycopyrrolate.

lmplications: Given the previously demonstrated side effects of glycopyrrolate 
and the declining need for medication induced anticholinergics during 
anesthesia, this study's finding add to the debate favoring use of the drug 
only on an as needed basis.


\\\\\
Effects of Critical Pathway Programs on Caregiver Team Interaction, 
Cohesiveness and Outcomes: A Pilot Project

Vicky Pebsworth Debold

Hospitals across the country are rapidly adopting critical pathway programs. 
These programs are believed to increase staff effectiveness and productivity 
which in turn, reduces patient care costs but improves patient outcomes. 
Underlying these presumed effects is the assumption that pathway programs 
change the way caregiver teams interact which then produces the desired staff 
and patient outcomes. This pilot project was designed to test whether there 
appears to be an empirical basis for assuming that interaction patterns and 
selected outcomes differ in pathway and non-pathway units. The project 
employed a static group comparison design and was conducted in two intensive 
care units, one that uses pathways and one that does not. The questionnaires 
distributed to nurses and physicians working in the units contained two 
measures of caregiver team interaction, two cohesiveness measures and three 
outcome measures -- job satisfaction, perceived technical quality of care and 
perceived ability to meet family member needs. Differences in mean scores 
across these measures will be assessed using descriptive statistics and tests 
of significance. To more fully understand differences in interaction and 
cohesiveness, a network analysis of formal, informal and social interaction 
frequencies will be performed using the UCINET program. The results of the 
pilot project will not only suggest whether the assumptions about pathways and 
their effects are valid which is important to researchers in the systems area, 
but the project employs measures and methods for studying interaction which 
could be used in many other areas of nursing research.


\\\\\
The Effects of Relaxation Breathing on COPD Patients in the Emergency 
Department

Marcia Bassity

With Benson's relaxation response as a theoretical framework, this 
experimental study assessed the effects of instruction in relaxation breathing 
on perceived anxiety, dyspnea, and oxygen saturation of COPD patients in the 
emergency department (ED). 14 patients were randomly assigned to receive 
instruction in slow chest breathing or standard care. Perceived anxiety and 
dyspnea were measured before and after treatment with visual analogue scales. 
Oxygen saturation was measured by pulse oximetry. Analyses of variance of main 
and simple effects by group and outcome were highly significant (F=9.5 to 
86.4, p=0.1 to .0009) in favor of the experimental group. The increases in 
oxygen saturation in the experimental group (M 3.4, SD 2.4) were clinically 
significant as well. If supported by further research teaching relaxation 
breathing to COPD patients is a simple, feasible, and effective intervention 
for ED nurses to perform.


\\\\\
Ethical Issues Facing Nurse Practitioners in Nebraska

Mary T. Sincebaugh

Nurse practitioners (NPs) are at the forefront of today's primary health care, 
using advanced nursing practice in a variety of settings. The role of the NP, 
as primary care provider, is expanding in the state of Nebraska. The purpose 
of this descriptive study is to identify ethical issues facing NPs in this 
state. Only one other study detailed the ethical dilemmas confronted by NPs in 
primary care. Another study which included NPs in the sample, prioritized 
ethical issues but did not separate NP results from other nonphysician 
providers. In the current study investigating certified NPs in Nebraska, 86 
subjects were mailed two questionnaires, the Demographic Data Form (DDF), and 
the Moral Conflict Questionnaire (MCQ), adapted with permission from Sara Fry, 
PhD, RN, FAAN. The DDF requested demographic information, and the MCQ asked 
the NPs to describe moral (ethical) issues they have encountered. Forty 
responses to the MCQ were received. Verbatim transcriptions are being analyzed 
independently by the primary investigator and two experienced researchers. 
Based on content analysis, a matrix will be constructed to categorize the 
identified ethical issues. This study will add to the limited information 
available on ethical issues facing NPs in primary care practice. Interventions 
may be identified by examination of these issues.


\\\\\
Exaggerated Cardiovascular Reactivity: An Early Indicator of Hypertension in 
Prepubescent African American Children

Jenise V. Gillespie

Exaggerated cardiovascular reactivity (blood pressure [BP] and heart rate [HR] 
response to stressful stimuli) in children has been shown to be an important 
predictor of hypertension later in life. Further, we know the prevalence of 
hypertension in African Americans is twice of European Americans. There is 
empirical evidence to suggest that aerobic exercise training in adults can 
help control heart rate and blood pressure responses to the stress induced by 
acute exercise. Therefore, it may be possible that exercise can help control 
exaggerated reactivity in children. Unfortunately, there is no literature to 
describe this in children. This experimental study will use a two group, pre-
test/post-test design with children assigned at random to the experimental and 
control groups. The levels of the independent variable will be aerobic 
exercise training and no aerobic exercise training. The primary dependent 
variable examined will be reactivity as measured by maximum minus minimum 
baseline blood pressure and heart rate. In order to examine the difference 
between the groups in changes in reactivity an ANCOVA will be performed 
entering the pre-test value as a covariate (alpha set a priori at .05). Should 
there be a decrease in exaggerated cardiovascular reactivity with exercise 
training in prepubescent African.


\\\\\
Finding Meaning, Spirituality, Perceived Stress, and Psychological Distress in 
Breast Cancer Survivors and A Comparison Group of Healthy Women

Susan M. Bauer, Carol J. Farran, Janice M. Zeller, Louis Fogg, David F. Cella, 
George Fitchett, and Kathleen Knafl

Purpose: to explore finding meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, and 
psychological distress in breast cancer survivors (BCS) (n=39) and a 
comparison group of healthy women (CW) (n=39). In 1995 183,000 American women 
were diagnosed with breast cancer; the majority will survive > 5 years. 
Although breast cancer has been associated with negative consequences, there 
is increasing evidence to suggest positive psycho-spiritual outcomes. Other 
research has found such outcomes to be associated with lower stress and 
stress-related health outcomes.

Conceptual Framework: an integration of Lazarus' and Folkman's stress-coping 
model with existential concepts.

Questions: (1) Do demographic factors have an effect on measures of finding 
meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, and psychological distress?; (2) What 
are the relationships between finding meaning, spirituality, perceived stress, 
and psychological distress?; and (3) Are there significant differences between 
BCSs and CWs on these variables?

Method: descriptive 2 group design utilizing mailed surveys administered to an 
unmatched convenience sample (88% response rate). The survey included: Life 
Attitude Profiles, Index of Core Spiritual Experiences, Brief POMS and 
Perceived Stress Scale.

Analysis: oneway analysis of variance, correlations, principal components 
analysis, MANOVA, ANCOVA, and t-tests.

Findings: There was significantly high variance within the BCS group on all 
study measures, with the presence or absence of children being a major 
contributor to the observed variance. Differences in finding meaning and 
spirituality were identified based on marital status, socio-economic status, 
religion, and age. The findings also support a conceptual framework that 
integrates existential and stress-coping perspectives.

Implications: Despite sampling limitations, results support facilitation of 
breast cancer survivors, to work through existential concerns as a vehicle to 
alleviate stress and associated mental and physical consequences. Confirmatory 
research including physiological measures is now in progress.


\\\\\
Fostering Influenza and Pneumococcal Immunization: A Nursing Intervention for 
Older Adults

Jennifer Peters

Influenza and pneumococcal immunizations are recommended for all older adults, 
yet few are immunized. Limited intervention research focuses on adult 
immunization. This study examined the effect of immunization education and 
persuasive behavioral counseling on the immunization behavior, health beliefs, 
and immunization knowledge of rural older Iowans. The Health Belief Model 
served as the study's theoretical base. A Solomon Four Group experimental 
design with repeated measures was used. Subjects (n=115) were Caucasians with 
a mean age of 73. Sixty percent were female. Dependent variables were 
evaluated at baseline and periodically over a 15 month period. Intervention 
had a significant, positive effect on immunization behavior, selected health 
beliefs, and immunization knowledge. Following intervention, experimental 
subjects demonstrated a 22% increase in influenza immunization and a 50% 
increase in pneumococcal immunization. The study has implications for nurse 
educators and nurses caring for older adults in all clinical settings. In 
addition, the study provides information relevant to future investigations of 
health behaviors of older adults and the Health Belief Model.


\\\\\
Health Care Treatment Decisions: Agreement Between Critical Care Nurses and 
Proxies

Joyce A. Neal

Autonomy, the right to determine one's course of action, has become the 
dominant ethical principle in the United States. In case of incapacity, 
honoring the prior expressed health care treatment wishes of an individual as 
stated in an advance directive preserves his/her autonomy. Often proxies, 
substitute decision makers, do not make decisions based on the patient's prior 
expressed wishes because of a lack of knowledge of those wishes. Critical care 
nurses (ccns) were chosen as the subjects for this study because in an 
intensive care unit they play an important role in the preservation of patient 
autonomy as they are frequently involved in discussions with patients and/or 
families regarding life-sustaining treatment decisions. Because of the pivotal 
position of ccns, this study seeks to learn: a) if ccns have executed advance 
directives, b) if ccns have discussed their preferences for life-sustaining 
treatments with their family, physician, and designated proxy, and c) if the 
treatment choices of ccns and their designated proxy agree using the scenarios 
and treatment choices from The Medical Directive. The ethical principle of 
autonomy provides the conceptual framework for this study. This study employs 
a comparative descriptive design to examine and describe the differences and 
similarities in health care treatment choices between a group of ccns and 
their proxies. Questionnaires were mailed for the nurse and the proxy to a 
random sample of 150 intensive care staff nurses who are members of the 
American Association of Critical Care Nurses. Descriptive statistics will be 
calculated. The kappa statistic will be used to measure concordance between 
ccns and proxies. This study is needed to provide the foundation for future 
research related to the advocacy role of ccns in helping patients to 
articulate their preferences for life-sustaining treatments and how this role 
influences the outcome of better quality patient care.


\\\\\
The Influence of Family and Friend Support on Weight Control Behavior in Low 
Income Culturally Diverse Women

Ernestine D. Stevenson, J. Walcott-McQuigg, L. Quinn, R. Marcantonio, A. Choi, 
and D. Camaioni

Little is known regarding the relationship of social support to weight control 
behavior (diet control and exercise), especially in low income culturally 
diverse women. Social support has been shown to influence variation in health 
promotion behavior. This study was designed to examine the effects of family 
and friend support on weight control behavior in 135 low-income women (36 
African-American, 31 Caucasian , 36 Hispanic, 32 Native American), between the 
ages of 30 and 60. The women were recruited from hospital clinics, community 
clinics, and community service centers. A questionnaire measuring family and 
friend support for diet and exercise behavior as well as actual diet and 
exercise behavior was administered in face-to face interviews. Reliability for 
the family and friend support scale using coefficient alpha raged from .66 to 
.95. Pearson's correlations revealed that family support for participation in 
exercise influenced African-American (r=.37, p<.05) and Native American 
(r=.40, p<.05) womens' rates of weight control behavior, while friends support 
for participation in exercise influenced rates of weight control behavior in 
Caucasian (r=.40, p<.05) and Hispanic (r=.40, p<.05) women. Identification of 
factors that influence weight control behavior in low income culturally 
diverse women will assist nurses and other health professionals to tailor 
effective health promoting interventions.


\\\\\
Leisure Management, Leisure Participation, and Well-Being in Midlife Women

Judith H. McDevitt

Although nurses promote the health of midlife women by advising them to 
participate in leisure activities such as exercise,just how women incorporate 
leisure activities into their work and family lives remains poorly understood. 
The purposes of this study were (1) to discover how midlife women manage their 
leisure to include the activities they prefer, and (2) to examine the links 
between their leisure management, leisure participation, and psychological 
well-being. Using naturalistic inquiry, 40 employed women aged 40 to 60 and 
living in a culturally diverse older suburb of Chicago were interviewed 
regarding their leisure management. They also completed a questionnaire 
including Kelly's comprehensive checklist of leisure participation covering 
physical, social, family, quiet home-based, outdoor, cultural, and volunteer 
activities; Bradburn's Affect Balance Scale; and Neugarten's Life Satisfaction 
Index. Inductive analysis was conducted using QSR NUDIST 3.04 software to 
code, index, and tree structure the interview data in order to identify 
differing approaches to how midlife woman manage their leisure. Data matrix 
displays then related these differing approaches to leisure management to the 
women's levels of leisure participation and well-being. Differences in leisure 
participation and well-being by leisure management were further analyzed by 
one-way analyses of variance. Findings from this study will be used to develop 
nursing interventions that will more effectively support leisure participation 
and well-being for women during midlife.


\\\\\
Meperidine Utilization and Compliance with AHCPR Guidelines at a Tertiary Care 
Hospital

Joseph Pellegrini and Judith Paice

Significance: The Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) 
established guidelines for the use of meperidine, a common inpatient 
analgesic. Despite these guideline, the literature continues to indicate 
inappropriate practitioner use and inadequate patient pain control. The 
question emerges: Who does not receive meperidine consistent with AHCPR 
guidelines?

Method: A perspective descriptive study, 300 inpatient charts reviewed at an 
urban academic medical center with an active pain service and pain research 
program, revealed 157 non-obstetrical patients had received meperidine, as the 
primary analgesic, in > 1 dose. Chart review included: age, sex, weight, 
dosing interval, route of administration, duration of meperidine use, serum 
chemistry values, primary diagnosis, associated medical conditions and 
concurrent medication use. 124 patients were found to be given meperidine to 
conflict with AHCPR guidelines regarding age, pain chronicity, presence of 
cancer, renal failure, or on drugs that are contraindicated when using 
meperidine. 20 patients were unable to be interviewed. The remaining 104 
patients were interviewed using an author designed questionnaire to ascertain 
medical and drug history, chronic pain syndromes, analgesic drug history and 
episodes of confusion and anxiety attributable to meperidine. Pain was 
ascertained using VAS (range=1 to 10), and analgesia satisfaction (range 1-5) 
scales.

Results: Subjects were found to be equally distributed by gender, and acute 
vs. chronic pain. The mean age was 49. Most frequent dosing schedule was 50 mg 
IM q4h prn, (mean 24 dose = 150mg). Median length of meperidine administration 
was 2 days (range 1 to 58 days). 40 percent received concurrent analgesics, 
most commonly, Vicodin. The group who received concurrent analgesics and < 500 
mg meperidine in 24 hours reported significantly higher satisfaction scores 
than the group who received only meperidine (p<.001). Nine percent were found 
to be on medications contraindicated with meperidine, but no adverse effects 
were noted. No differences in pain control satisfaction (p=.40377) were noted 
by pain chronicity status. No significant increase in anxiety or confusion was 
noted except when correlated with age (p=.02). Although 15 patients were found 
to be in moderate to severe renal failure, no unequal distribution of 
increased confusion, anxiety or delirium was noted.

Discussion and Implications: Meperidine continues to be prescribed contrary to 
AHCPR guidelines. Because of the potential for unfavorable outcomes, 
replication of this study in multiple institutions and across the patient's 
entire hospitalization is warranted.


\\\\\
Nurse Practitioner/Physician Collaborative Practice in Missouri: An Inside 
View

Sandra L. Stewart

Although the role of the nurse practitioner (NP) has been in existence for 
almost 30 years, there is no universal definition of that role and its 
relationship with the physician (MD) role in collaborative practice (CP). 
Collaboration requires determining a mutual goal, establishing an attitude of 
reciprocal respect and trust, and activating an environment of support and 
commitment through cooperation and assertion. To explore NP/MD CP, a survey 
tool addressing satisfaction and perceived proficiencies, barriers, settings, 
future directions,a nd regulation issues  was mailed to NPs in the state of 
Missouri. In addition, NP viewpoints regarding ideal and current CP practice 
were compared. A descriptive, cross-sectional design was employed using basic 
demographic data, Likert and rank-order scales, and a minimum of open-ended, 
short-answer questions. Essential findings, conclusions, and implications of 
this research are in the process of being obtained, and will be finalized for 
presentation at this conference. Due to the lack of primary care MDs and the 
increasing number of primary care NPs, it is vital that NP/MD CP be explored 
and evaluated to facilitate cost effective, high quality health care in the 
state of Missouri.


\\\\\
Ohio Physicians Perceived Incentives for Association with Advanced Practice 
Nurses

Joyce Richelle Arand

This descriptive comparative study is a replication study conducted of one by 
John Bezjak in 1985. The study examined Ohio physician's incentives to 
associate with advanced practice nurses. The physician incentives were 
compared to physician demographics including: number of years in practice, 
gender, the state where medical school was attended, and specialty area of 
practice. Participants for the study were Ohio physicians associated with 
nurses in advanced practice who are members of the Ohio Coalition of Nurses 
with Specialty Certification. Data were collected by mail questionnaires. Data 
analysis includes descriptions of the demographic characteristics, factor 
analysis, analysis of variance, and a specific comparison test. Results showed 
no relationship between the demographic variables and physician's incentives 
for association with advanced practice nurses. The major reason Ohio 
physicians associate with advanced practice nurses were economic incentives 
and physician satisfaction. The study indicated that even though statues limit 
the scope of advanced practice nursing in the state of Ohio, some physicians 
still choose to practice with advanced practice nurses. Physicians in the 
study feel that there is a benefit to collaborative practice. It was concluded 
from this study that a roster of advanced practice nurses within the state of 
Ohio is necessary to regulate practice and to enhance research involving 
advanced practice nursing. Education of physicians, nurses and the public 
about the role of the advanced practice nurse is also necessary.


\\\\\
Pain Management in the Emergency Department

Gaile L. Nellett, Ching-Eng Wang, Patricia Hooper, and Dorothy M. Lanuza

Although pain is a symptom experienced by a majority of all patients admitted 
to the Emergency Department (ED), there is little information about pain 
management in this area. Therefore, the purpose of this descriptive study was 
to examine ED pain management practice in a midwest university medical center, 
as determined by patient interviews just prior to discharge/transfer and chart 
audits. The Gate Control Theory was the conceptual framework used. Based on 
the previous year's ED admission patterns (i.e., days of the week and shifts), 
17 shifts were randomly and proportionally sampled. The convenience sample 
consisted of 129 patients (age 18 through 90, mean=47.7 years + SD 21.6; 53% 
females and 47% males) admitted with non-life threatening conditions and who 
experienced pain. The findings demonstrated that 94% of the patients were 
satisfied with their pain management. Yet while 64% had reported that an 
acceptable level of pain for them, on a scale of 0-10, would be a rating of 
less than 5, 35% reported their pain at more than 5 at the time of their 
interview. Documentation of systematic pain assessment was evident in only 5% 
of the charts audited. Therefore, intervention strategies are needed to 
improve pain assessment and treatment in the ED, as well as future research in 
that area.


\\\\\
Parental Alcohol Use: An Interaction Study

Pat Jamerson

The effects of maternal alcohol use on fetal development have been well 
documented; however, less is known about outcomes associated with paternal use 
and even less about interaction effects if both paternal and maternal alcohol 
use are present. Yet, it is rare that a woman who drinks alcohol does not have 
a partner who also drinks alcohol. The purpose of this study is to explore the 
developmental outcomes using an animal model when maternal and/or paternal 
alcohol use occurs. Twenty male and twenty female Sprague-Dawley rats were 
randomly assigned to either exposure or non-exposure groups. Exposed males 
were gavage-fed alcohol daily for 60 days before breeding. Exposed females 
were gavage-fed alcohol on days 14 and 15 of gestation. Four treatment groups 
were compared: male treated/female non-treated, male treated/female treated, 
male non-treated/female treated, and male non-treated/female non-treated. 
Offspring outcome measures include litter size, birthweight, organ weights, 
negative geotaxis, hanging suspension, righting reflex, continuous corridor 
gait measurements, and right angle and figure-eight maze studies. Chi-square, 
MANOVA, and regression analyses will be conducted upon completion of data 
collection. Findings from this study will contribute information regarding 
prenatal maternal and/or paternal alcohol use and intrauterine fetal 
development.


\\\\\
Patient-Consumer Perceptions and Responses to Professional Nursing Care: 
Instrument Development

Mary B. Killeen

The purpose of the study is to develop instruments to assist nurse researchers 
and nurse managers in the measurement of patient satisfaction with nursing 
care. This research will provide quality care of indices and will enable the 
nursing profession to target efforts for educating the public about nurses and 
nursing care. King's (1981) conceptual framework guides this survey research. 
Perception, is of major importance to the conceptualization of patient-
consumer perceptions and responses to professional nursing care. In addition, 
King has used patient terms in identifying four roles of nurses which form the 
proposed dimensions of the perceptions instruments: care giver, teacher, 
friend, and advocate.

Research questions address the reliability and validity estimation of the 
proposed six instruments which will be presented as an approximately 60 item 
questionnaire. Item analysis and internal consistency reliability will be 
addressed in both the initial testing and instrument refinement phases. Test-
retest reliability will be conducted on a sub-sample in the overall study. 
Validity estimation will include face, content, and construct validity 
(convergent-divergent, and exploratory factor analysis). The target population 
is adult patients (perinatal, surgical, medical) who are discharged from 
inpatient units of urban, suburban, and rural Michigan hospitals. Power 
analysis indicated a sample size of 960 subjects is needed (50% response 
expected).


\\\\\
Perceived Needs of Parents of Critically Ill Children

Linda D. Scott

Researchers have examined the perceived needs of family members of critically 
ill adults. In the pediatric population, research has been limited to 
noncrisis hospitalization. Recent research has begun to explore unexpected 
pediatric critical care admissions and parental needs. The purpose of this 
study was to (a) identify the perceived needs of parents of critically ill 
hospitalized children, (b) identify parental needs as perceived by critical 
care nurses, and (c) identify the differences in these perceptions. Crisis 
theory ad King's (1981) conceptual framework for nursing provided the 
theoretical foundation. A descriptive research design with a non-probability 
convenience sample consisting of 30 parents or primary caretakers of 
critically ill children and 30 pediatric critical care nurses was used in this 
study. Data were obtained by a structured interview using a 53 item modified 
version of Molter's (1979) CCFNI. Data analysis included a comparison of the 
relationship of total scorn between the parents and nurses. No significant 
differences were found between the two groups by a two-tailed paired t-test. 
The specific perceived needs identified by the parents and nurses were 
analyzed using rank ordering and the Wilcoxin matched-pairs signed ranks test. 
Overall, the parents and the nurses identified similar prioritization of need 
statements. Significant differences were noted between parent/nurse matched 
pairs on approximately a quarter of the items. Information, assurance and 
proximity to the critically ill child were identified as priority needs of the 
parents in this study. By consistently incorporating these perceived needs 
identified by the parents into the plan of care, nurses can assist the parents 
in the identification and fulfillment of support, comfort and self-care needs 
that had less perceived importance. This study supports the need to 
investigate interventions to better address parental needs of critically ill 
children. Research based interventions will facilitate improved parental 
adaptation to their child's critical hospitalization.

\\\\\
Perceived Quality of Life of Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator Recipients

Pamela McCabe

Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is a leading cause of death in North America. The 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) has been used to successfully 
treat individuals at risk for SCD. Morbidity and survival of ICD recipients 
have been widely studied, however, their quality of life (QOL) has been 
frequently studied. The purpose of this descriptive, longitudinal study was to 
describe the QOL of ICD recipients, and to explore the importance of QOL 
domains to ICD recipients. Ferrans (1990) conceptual model of QOL was the 
framework for this study. The Quality of Life Index-Cardiac Version (QLI-CV) 
was used to measure QOL. Part II of the QLI-CV was used to examine importance 
of QOL domains. Subjects (n=35) recruited from a midwestern tertiary care 
center completed the mailed questionnaires at one and six months after ICD 
implantation. Mean scores for the total QLI-CV and subscales were reported. No 
significant difference was found when one and six month total and subscale 
scores were compared by using a paired t-test QOL domains considered most 
important were related to family, health, symptoms, and spirituality. QLI-CV 
scores of this study's ICD recipients were found to be comparable to or higher 
than other cardiac subjects studied with the QLI-CV. Clinicians who counsel 
ICD recipients may find this information useful.


\\\\\
Prevalence of Childhood Lead Poisoning in Non-Urban Areas of Wisconsin and 
Associated Risk Factors

Marjorie J. Coons

Lead poisoning (>10 microgram/dl) is the most common environmental disease of 
children under age six. Blood levels as low as 10 microgram/dl, once thought 
to be safe, are associated with behavioral, cognitive, and developmental 
consequences that if uncorrected may result in permanent cognitive deficits, 
anemia, and kidney damage. Preliminary findings described the prevalence of 
lead poisoning in nonurban areas of Wisconsin and examined risk factors for 
lead poisoning. During the study period (7-1-94 to 6-30-95), there were 26,482 
children ages 6-71 months old who were screened. The prevalence of lead 
poisoning ranges from a low of 1/1,000 children in Calumet and Chippewa 
counties to a high of 59/1,000 children in Rock county. Using state laboratory 
data (n=24,130), 15.9% of children who were screened tested positive, which is 
nearly twice the national rate of 9%. The highest percentages of positive 
screenings occurred in Marathon (31.4%), La Crosse (28.2%), Sheboygan (28.0%), 
and Rock (25.0%) counties. Statistically significant increased risks were 
associated with being a toddler (12-35 months) (Odds Ratios (OR) = 1.3), male 
gender (OR = 1.25), black race (OR = 2.6), and socioeconomic status (OR = 
1.9). For the final analyses, these findings will be compared to data from the 
urban counties of Milwaukee and Racine. These preliminary findings, 
nonetheless, indicate that lead poisoning is a significant threat to the 
health of young children in rural counties throughout Wisconsin. These 
findings will be used to set priorities for lead screening in Wisconsin and 
will serve as baseline data for county and statewide childhood lead poisoning 
prevention programs.


\\\\\
The Perimenopausal Experience in Physically Active Women - A Pilot Study

Suling Li

Perimenopause is defined as experiencing changes in menstrual pattern or no 
menstruation for three to eleven months. Little research exists regarding this 
perimenopausal experience in physically active women. This pilot study was 
undertaken to test tools currently available for measuring symptomatology and 
level of physical activity. A sample of 14 perimenopausal nursing faculty 
(mean age = 47 years; range 41-54 years) with varied levels of physical 
activity and at different stages of perimenopause completed the following 
tools: Women's Health Assessment Scale, Physical Activity Questionnaires 
(Current and Long-term), Health History Questionnaires, and Demographic 
Questionnaire. In the preliminary results, the most frequently reported 
symptoms were hot flashes, early morning wakening, forgetfulness, lack of 
energy and difficulty concentrating. Ratings for how bothersome each symptom 
is will be analyzed. Correlations between symptomatology, levels of physical 
activity and quality of life will be examined. These findings will provide the 
basis for further examination of any relationships between levels of physical 
activity and the experience of perimenopausal symptoms.


\\\\\
Returning to Work Post-Liver Transplant

Sarah E. Newton

Returning to work (RTW) is both an important behavioral outcome and an 
indication of an adult liver transplant recipient's attainment of maximum 
health post-transplant. With adult liver transplant (OLT) recipients' one-year 
survival rates exceeding 90 percent and the majority of them assessed as being 
physically able to work, there is a paucity of empirical data to explain why 
less than 30 percent of the adult OLT recipients ever RTW post-transplant. 
Some variables related to recipient RTW have been identified, but the amount 
of variance accounted for by them is less than 20 percent. The purpose of this 
retrospective survey is to explore adult OLT recipients beliefs' regarding RTW 
and to examine whether a model comprised of sense of coherence, hardiness, and 
conception of health has explanatory power for the phenomenon of adult OLT 
recipient RTW. The data will be collected via mailed survey from a sample of 
300 adult OLT recipients who received their transplants at a large midwestern 
medical center and who are at least six months post-transplant. In order to 
evaluate the theoretical model, it is anticipated that hierarchical multiple 
regression analysis will be the statistical technique utilized. The results of 
this investigation will help to explain the phenomenon of post-liver 
transplant recipient RTW as well as differences in the recipients 
post-transplant attainment of their maximum health potentials.


\\\\\
Risk Factors for Falling Among Psychiatric Inpatients

Yun-Fang Tsai

Although risk factors for falling have been identified in a variety of patient 
populations, researchers have paid little attention to falls among psychiatric 
patients. Using Hendrich's Fall Risk Model as a guide, the purposes of this 
descriptive study were (a) to document the prevalence of previously identified 
risk factors for falls in a group of acutely ill psychiatric patients, (b) to 
determine if patients who fell differed from non-fallers with respect to risk 
factors, and (c) to describe the circumstances surrounding falls that occurred 
on the unit. All patients admitted to an acute psychiatric unit during a six 
month period were entered into the study (N=192). Twice a day, nurses who 
worked on the unit completed a fall risk factors checklist for each patient. 
This checklist was derived from Hendrich's model and research on falls among 
psychiatric patients. When a fall occurred, nurses completed an additional 
instrument designed to measure circumstances associated with the fall. Among 
all of the patients, the most frequently occurring risk factors were a 
clinical diagnosis of depression and confusion or disorientation. Twelve 
patients fell during their hospitalization. Compared to non-fallers, patients 
who fell were more likely to have a previous history of falls, generalized 
weakness, confusion or disorientation, difficulty with mobility or walking, 
and elimination problems. Analysis of circumstances surrounding falls revealed 
that the majority of falls occurred when patients were attempting to get out 
of bed or walk to the bathroom at night. Findings from this research can be 
used to identify psychiatric patients who are at risk for falls during their 
hospitalization.


\\\\\
Risks of Gestational Diabetes in Northern Plains Native American Women

Mary Lynn Eaglestaff

Up to 30% of northern plains Native American women will experience the risks 
of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) within this year, and because of the 
poor screening protocol developed in workIng with these women, the numbers are 
likely to be more (Welty, 1993). In comparison, 2 to 3% of the general 
population of American pregnant women will experience gestational diabetes 
(Tinker, 1994). Gestational diabetes causes maternal-mortality rates to double 
within the Native American population with a rate of 19.9% deaths per 100,000 
women (van Breda, 1989). Because the risks of gestational diabetes can include 
increased likelihood of preeclampsia and eclampsia, macrosomia congenital 
anomalies, and increased frequency of cesarian section due to deteriorating 
fetal conditions, the implications for long term effects to the child and 
mother present serious health concerns that good nursing care can have an 
impact on (Gunderson, 1992, Rith-Najarian, Ness, Faulhaber & Godhes, in press, 
van Breda, 1989). The purpose of this ongoing observational study is to 
examine the incidence and risks of gestational diabetes in 100 randomly 
selected northern plains pregnant women. Orem's Theory of Self-Deficit is 
guiding the study. It is hypothesized that there will be significant 
differences between GDM occurrences in Native American and Euro American 
pregnant women and measures of the 1-hour glucose tolerance test (GTT), 
activity levels, anthropometric and demographic data, maternal health risks, 
self-care agency and wellbeing. Data will be collected at 12-18 weeks of 
pregnancy, 26-32 weeks of pregnancy, and within 4 weeks of delivery. 
Distributions will be obtained for the above defined measures. Differences 
will be analyzed between the groups of women experiencing GDM and those 
asymptomatic for GDM over time using the repeated measures ANOVA. Nurses need 
to work more closely within ethnic and cultural practices when counseling 
at-risk northern plains Native American pregnant women for dietary and 
exercise practices.


\\\\\
Sustained Effects of Relaxing Music on Heart Rate Variability Following Acute 
Myocardial Infarction

Jill M. White

Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is the leading cause of death in the United 
States. Decreased heart rate variability (HRV) is associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality in this population. Increased anxiety leads to 
increased sympathetic nervous system activation, resulting in decreased HRV. 
Studies have demonstrated that music therapy can elicit a relaxation response 
in those who have recently suffered AMI. Inducing a relaxation response may 
interrupt or reverse some of the deleterious effects of AMI by increasing 
vagal tone, thereby increasing HRV. Therefore, the purpose of this exploratory 
pilot study was to determine the effects of relaxing music on HRV following 
AMI.

Six newly diagnosed AMI patients were recruited for participation. Four hours 
of continuously recorded ECG data were collected for each subject. The ECG 
recording included 30 minutes of baseline data, a 20-minute music session, and 
approximately 3 hours of post-intervention data. These data were analyzed by 
means of power spectral analysis with fast Fourier transform. HRV increased by 
10.4% during the music session and peaked one hour after the intervention, 
reflecting a 32.4% increase. Baseline levels of HRV returned 1.75 hours after 
the music session concluded. Further study in this area may provide support 
for the use of relaxing music as a nursing intervention to increase HRV and 
reduce mortality and morbidity in the AMI population.

\\\\\
The Relationship Between Cervical Cancer Screening and Provider Type, Provider 
Willingness, and Availability of Service

Carolyn Bryant

According to the US Preventative Service Task Force (1994) approximately 
15,000 new cases of cervical cancer and 4,600 deaths from cervical cancer are 
estimated per year in the US. Effectiveness of early detection of cervical 
cancer through Pap smear testing has been well documented in the literature. 
In spite of this effectiveness, there is still a large population of women who 
are not screened. Factors that affect the use of cancer screening programs by 
women include among others, type of provider, provider willingness to perform 
screening, socio-economic status and age, especially middle-aged and elderly 
women. The purpose of this descriptive correlational study is to determine if 
provider type, provider willingness and availability (financial compensation) 
are associated with increased participation in cervical cancer screening of 
middle-aged and elderly women (ages 40-75). The theoretical perspective used 
for this study is case management theory, a combination of primary health care 
and self care theory. A convenience sample of 100 women will be obtained 
through contacts at a health promotion booth in a shopping mall in 
Northeastern Ohio. Data regarding cervical cancer screening, provider type, 
willingness to perform screening and availability of services will be 
gathered. Contingency tables will be developed and measures of association 
will be used to examine the relationship between the use of cervical cancer 
screening tests and provider type, willingness and availability. Findings from 
the study can shed light on the importance of factors that promote cervical 
cancer screening. It is also anticipated this study will provide used 
information to assist clinicians in the early detection of cervical cancer.


\\\\\
The Relationship Between Definition of Health and Practice of Health Promoting 
Behaviors of Individuals

Leann Whyte

Rising health care costs and the prevalence of preventable diseases in the 
U.S. have prompted health care providers and the government to focus on the 
promotion of health. How individuals define health may be an important factor 
in what behaviors they perform to maintain their health. Pender's Health 
Promotion Model is the framework for this study that examined the definition 
of health and practice of health promoting behaviors in a convenience sample 
of 105 predominantly Caucasian men and women. Subjects were given the Laffrey 
Health Conception Scale, which assesses the definition of health as clinical 
(absence of illness), role performance (ability to perform one's expected 
roles), adaptive (adapting and interacting with the environment), or 
eudaimonistic (feeling of well-being and exuberance); the Health Promoting 
Lifestyle Profile, which measures health promoting behaviors; a subjective 
health rating scale; and a fill in question asking subjects what they do to 
maintain their health. There was a significant relationship between the 
practice of health promoting behaviors and those who defined health as role 
performance (r=.1948) or eudaimonistic (r=.2067) compared with those who 
defined it as clinical or adaptive (p<.05). Other significant findings showed 
that women (r=.2356) and subjects with more education (r=.2228) scored more 
eudaimonistically (p<.05). Participants who defined health as role 
performance, adaptive, and eudaimonistic rated their health higher than those 
who defined it clinically. Gaining an understanding about factors that 
influence what behavior client's do to maintain or enhance their health is 
crucial for nurses, in order to facilitate the setting of mutual health care 
goals.


\\\\\
The Relationship of Certification to Job Satisfaction, Autonomy, and Salary in 
Emergency Nurses

Corinne D. Wilhoit

With Stamps and Piedmonte's conception of job satisfaction as a framework, it 
was hypothesized that certified emergency nurses would report higher job 
satisfaction and autonomy than uncertified nurses and a salary increase as a 
result of certification. Reasons for seeking certification were also assessed. 
86 certified and 95 non-certified nurses completed the Index of Work 
Satisfaction (Stamps & Piedmonte) and questions on demographics and 
certification history. t-tests revealed that certified nurses had 
significantly higher total satisfaction, satisfaction with pay, and 
satisfaction with autonomy than non-certified nurses. 31.4% received a salary 
increase as a result of certification. The chief reasons for seeking 
certification were professional competence and personal satisfaction; barriers 
were cost, preparation time, and lack of perceived benefits. Employer 
promotion of certification should emphasize intrinsic benefits and provide 
some tangible support or reward for the effort.


\\\\\
The Subculture of Agriculture and Preventive Health Care: Meeting Health Needs 
of Rural Men

Sandra J. Clarkson

American farmers should be recognized as subculture whose individual health 
behaviors may reflect values derived from the agrarian tradition. Community 
health nurses in rural farming communities require an understanding of the 
influence of the value system of this subculture on preventive health 
practice. A men's health screening clinic program was implemented in a rural 
north central Missouri agricultural county in which 25% of the population 
reside on a farm. Men from throughout the county were involved int eh program 
planning in an effort to make the program culturally sensitive to farmers and 
ensure participation. Fifty men age 35-82 received multidisciplinary 
comprehensive health screening that included testing specific for agricultural 
occupational illness. This study was a secondary analysis of participant 
responses on an evaluation questionnaire measuring consumer opinion of the 
men's health clinic. Analysis revealed a high degree of satisfaction with 
clinic services.


\\\\\
Urogenital Distress and Psychosocial Impact of Urinary Incontinence on Elderly 
Women

Martha S. Gallagher

Urinary incontinence (UI) is a common health deviation affecting millions of 
elderly women. The purpose of this research was to discern if a relationship 
existed between urogenital distress and psychosocial impact of UI on elderly 
women. The Roy Adaptation Model provided the conceptual basis for this study. 
Urogenital distress was evaluated using the Urogenital Distress Inventory with 
stress, irritative/discomfort, and obstructive subscales. Psychosocial impact 
was evaluated using the Incontinence Impact Questionnaire with travel, social 
relationships, physical activities, and emotional health subscales. Seventeen 
community-dwelling women over age 60 with UI at least once a week comprised 
the sample. A significant positive relationship was found between urogenital 
distress and psychosocial impact of UI (r=.68, p=.003). The negative 
psychosocial impact of UI on elderly women demands effective nursing 
interventions to promote optimal adaptation. Both the public and health 
professionals must be educated to enhance their awareness of the problem such 
that appropriate treatment is sought and provided.


\\\\\
What is the Relationship Between Personality Hardiness and Burnout in Army 
Reserve Nurses

Nancy M. Marchido

Kobasa's conceptualization of personality hardiness provided the theoretical 
framework examined. The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship 
between personality hardiness (control, commitment, and challenge) and burnout 
in Army Reserve nurses. Data was obtained through a survey of forty Army 
Reserve nurses in the midwest area using Kobasa's Hardiness Scale and Jones' 
Staff Burnout Scale for Health Professionals. The subjects were primarily 
female (75%) and Caucasian (90%),with a bachelor of science degree or higher. 
A moderately strong inverse correlation was found (r=0.52, df=35, p<.001). The 
validity and reliability were supported, however, the dimension of challenge 
was not related to burnout. Control and commitment correlated with burnout 
(r=-.61, r=-.57 respectively). Findings suggest that personality hardiness 
provides a resistance source in the perception of adverse job stressors, thus 
the areas of health promotion, health maintenance and in disease prevention is 
important.


\\\\\
Women's Cognitive Models of the Pre-Treatment State I Breast Cancer Illness 
Experience

Brenda D. Brown

Breast cancer has emerged in recent years as a major public health problem 
affecting 1 in every 8 women over their life time. The body of knowledge 
concerned with women's psychological responses to breast cancer reveals little 
about the subjective illness experience and its impact on personal responses 
from the affected woman's point of view. The purpose of this study is to 
explore a woman's subjective pre-treatment Stage 1 breast cancer illness 
experience and related courses of reported prescriptive and nonprescriptive 
health care action in a nonrandom sample (n=10) of middle-age, middle-income, 
American-born, Caucasian women from their perspective. Donnelly's Cognitive 
Models of Reality provides the conceptual framework for study methodology. 
Data collection will employ audio-tape recorded, subject-structured interviews 
conducted face-to-face and by telephone after the treatment decision is made, 
but prior to treatment implementation. Verbatim audio-taped transcripts will 
be systematically examined to identify each subject's ideas, opinions, 
thoughts, and interpretations of her breast cancer illness experience, in 
terms of its personal and interpersonal significance, and identify actual and 
anticipated health care actions and their significance. Data will be examined 
for a relationship between personal health care actions and cognitive models 
of the illness experience. Findings may offer insight into the range of health 
care activities that women employ during the pretreatment phase of the disease 
and their significance in facilitating personal psychological adjustment to 
having breast cancer. Findings may further suggest nursing strategies that 
would enable affected women to effectively use health care personnel and 
information resources to address their breast cancer illness related concerns.


\\\\\
Age Comparison of Clinical And Psychosocial Parameters in Heart Transplant 
Patients at 6 Months Post-Op: Ages Over 60 vs Under 60

Anne Jalowiec, K. Grady, C. White-Williams, S. Fazekas, M. Laff, V. Davidson-
Bell, K. Florczak, E. Kracht, G. Willson, M. Farneti, S. Li, and L. Adams

PURPOSE: To compare clinical & psychosocial parameters in two age groups of 
heart transplant (HT) pts at 6 months post-op.

RATIONALE: Previously, the age cut-off for HTs was 55; now pts as old as 70 
are getting new hearts, so it is imperative to examine how well the older pts 
do after HT.

SAMPLE: 175 pts at 6 months post-HT. Age range: 24-71; 26% > 60. Subjects were 
mainly male, white, & well educated, with no significant age differences in 
any demographics.

DATA: 10-year NIH study; two major medical centers.

TOOLS: HT Clinical Form, HT Symptom Scale, Sickness Impact Profile, Work 
History, Compliance Scale, HT Stressor Scale, Jalowiec Coping Scale, Quality 
of Life Index. Psychometric strength of all tools is well supported.

ANALYSIS: T-tests, chi square.

RESULTS: Main significant age differences: self-care ability, ambulation,work 
stress, coping. No significant age differences: heart function (eg: NYHA, 
LVEF, CO, CI); kidney function (creatinine, BUN); length of HT stay; symptoms; 
# of rejections, infections, complications; lipids; # of meds; % working; 
satisfaction with HT; quality of life.

CONCLUSIONS: In most clinical & psychosocial areas, pts > 60 did as well as 
younger pts at 6 months after HT. Heart function was comparable in both age 
groups.

IMPLICATIONS: Findings can help improve age decisions for HT eligibility.


\\\\\
Coping With the Wait for Heart Transplant: A Spouse's Perspective

Eileen Collins, Margaret Schulz, Connie White-Williams, and Anne Jalowiec

Purpose: To examine coping strategies used by spouses of heart transplant 
candidates during the wait for heart transplant (HT).

Sample: 134 spouses of HT candidates: 121 F, 13 M; mean age=51 yrs.

Model: Lazarus stress/coping.

Tools: Jalowiec Coping Scale, Spouse Transplant Stressor Scale, Family 
Inventory of Resources for Management (FIRM), Ferrans & Powers Quality of Life 
Index. All tools had good psychometrics.

Results: The following coping behaviors were used most by spouses: tried to 
think positively, prayed/put trust in God, thought about the good things in 
life, tried to handle things one step at a time, and tried to keep busy. More 
effective coping strategies were associated with better quality of life 
(r=.44, p<0.001), more family resources available for coping (r=.46, p<0.001), 
and less stress (r=-.36, p<0.001). Optimistic, palliative, and supportant 
coping were more effective strategies for women than for men.

Implications: Describing coping strategies used by spouses will assist in 
designing interventions to help spouses with waiting for HT.


\\\\\
The Incidence and Mortality Rate of Chronic Rejection in Lung Transplant 
Patients

Nancy M. Spector, M. Connolly, S. Li, E. Garrity, A. Montoya, and A. Husain

Chronic rejection in lung transplant (LT) patients is manifested as 
obliterative bronchiolitis (OB) and is the most common cause of late deaths 
(>180 days) in this population. Retrospective chart reviews were done on all 
LTs (including heart and lung) performed since 1986 (N=141) to study the 
incidence and mortality of OB. (Error rate on the accuracy of chart data 
retrieval < 7%.) LT pts with OB were matched to those w/o OB, on age, gender, 
diagnosis, and date/type of LT; however, the heart-lung (HLT) sample was too 
small for matching. Twenty-one percent (29/141) of the LTs had histologically 
proven OB, which occurred at a mean of 478 days (+379) post LT. The incidence 
of OB was not significantly different in the 3 types of LTs: single-lung 
(SLT)=22% (16/74); bilateral-lung (BLT)=17% (9/52); HLT=27% (4/15). Gender was 
not significantly different across the 3 groups. However, there was a 
significant difference (p<.05) between the groups for age (SLT 55+7.5; DLT 
32+13; HLT 34+16), probably because SLTs are usually done for COPD, while the 
other 2 types are done on younger pts (eg cystic fibrosis). Mortality rates 
were significantly different (p=.0008) in SLT pts with OB (71%) and matched 
controls w/o OB (7%), but not significantly different in BLT pts with OB (25%) 
and w/o OB (12.5%). Therefore, BLT pts may have better pre-op respiratory 
reserve than SLT, perhaps due to age or pre-op diagnosis. Future nursing 
research needs to identify predictors of better outcomes on LT pts with OB.


\\\\\
Predicting Risk of Postoperative Atelectasis/Pneumonia After Abdominal Surgery

Jo Ann Brooks-Brunn

Following abdominal surgery, postoperative atelectasis and pneumonia are 
frequent and associated with increased morbidity and mortality, hospital 
length of stay and resource utilization. The purpose of this prospective model 
building study was to determine which combination of risk factors best 
predicted the development of atelectasis/pneumonia following abdominal 
surgery. A multi-criteria definition of atelectasis/pneumonia was used and 15 
risk factors were assessed. Data collection included a preoperative interview 
and chest exam followed by daily subject interviews, chest exams and chart 
reviews on postoperative days 1-6. A sample of 561 subjects was accrued at 4 
institutions and the incidence of postoperative atelectasis/pneumonia was 
22.5%. The sample was split using a randomized stratified technique into a 
model development set (n=400) and model validation set (n=161). Fifteen risk 
factors with a p < .10 were identified in the zero order correlations of risk 
factor and outcome. Using logistic regression modeling techniques, 6 risk 
factors were included in the final model: age > 65 years, BMI > 27, impaired 
preoperative cognition, history of cancer, current smoker within the past 8 
weeks, and surgical incision location. Utility of the model was assessed by 
correct classification (78.5%), sensitivity (23.3%) and specificity (94.5%). 
The Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness of Fit Test for the 6 factor model was 5.9029 
(p=.5511) demonstrating that the model is a good fit over the range of 
probabilities 00.0-1.0. Validation of the model is in process with a sample of 
260 subjects (n=161 validation set + 100 new subjects).


\\\\\
Preoperative Morphine is Key in Attenuating Surgery-Induced Increases in Tumor 
Metastasis

Gayle C. Page and Shamgar Ben-Eliyahu

We have previously shown that analgesic doses of morphine (MOR) attenuate 
surgery-induced increases in tumor metastasis. This study explored the 
relative importance of pre- vs postoperative MOR treatments in this paradigm. 
Natural killer cells control the metastasis of MADB106 tumor cells, a 
syngeneic mammary adenocarcinoma, in the lungs. Rats underwent either surgery 
or anesthesia, MOR or its vehicle (VEH) was administered to all rats at 3 
times: (1) 30 min preoperatively, (2) the end of surgery, and (3) 5h 
postoperatively. Surgery groups included: surgery/VEH, surgery/MOR (MOR at 
times 1-3), surgery/before (MOR at time 1), surgery/after (MOR at times 2-3), 
and surgery/after-total (MOR at times 2 [plus preoperative dose]-3). 
Anesthesia groups received either MOR or VEH at times 1-3. At 5h 
postoperative, all rats were injected with radiolabeled MADB106 tumor cells 
(tail vein), and lungs were removed 14h later to assess their radioactive 
content. Surgery resulted in a 2-fold increase in tumor cell retention which 
was significantly attenuated in all surgery groups receiving MOR. Moreover, 
the groups receiving preoperative MOR benefitted from the MOR treatment more 
than those receiving MOR only after surgery, and were the only groups that 
were not significantly higher than the anesthesia/VEH group. These results 
imply that although postoperative MOR is beneficial,the preoperative 
administration of MOR is key in optimizing its attenuating effects on surgery-
induced enhancement of metastasis.


\\\\\
Attitudes Toward Menstruation Among Women in Urban Area of China

Mei-yu Yu, Nancy Reame, Xiu-lan Zhu, and Yu-ying Wu

In light of the belief that attitudes can influence the perception of disease 
or any body function, it has been questioned if cultural variations in 
attitudes toward menstruation have an impact on menstrual distress. In order 
to explore the influence of attitudes toward menstruation on menstrual-related 
symptoms among women in China, the Brooks-Gunn and Ruble's Menstrual Attitude 
Questionnaire was modified for cultural relevance and administered to 322 
healthy women aged 24 to 42 years randomly selected from an urban area of 
China. Four factors were generated from the exploratory factor analysis. The 
mean scores for these factors from highest to lowest were 5.4 for the factor 
named "menstruation as a natural event" (based on a 7-point scale with 
1=disagree strongly and 7=agree strongly), 4.6 for "anticipation and 
prediction of the event", 4.4 for "menstruation as a debilitating event", and 
3.4 for "denial of the effects". The women who had a higher level of education 
were more likely to agree with anticipation and prediction of the event 
(p=.003) and less likely to deny the effects of menstruation (p=.009). Of the 
322 participants, 58 women filled out the questionnaire again during the 
following menstrual cycle. The test-retest reliability coefficients ranged 
from a low of .65 to a high of .80 (p=.000) for the four factors. Our finding 
that the Chinese participants scored highest on menstruation as a natural 
event is similar to the finding from a group of Indian women studied by 
Chandra & Chaturvedi (1992). Further exploration of cultural variations in 
attitudes toward menstruation and their impacts on perception of menstrual 
symptoms should enrich our knowledge of the etiology of perimenstrual symptoms 
of Chinese women as well as women of other cultures.


\\\\\
Menopausal Symptoms: Hormone Replacement Therapy vs. Running

Patricia J. Estok and E. Rudy

The purpose of this study was to compare the physical, psychological and 
sexual symptoms that occur during menopause in women runners and nonrunners 
who are on hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) and those who are not. A 
stratified sample of 169 women with a mean age of 56.3 years included 42 
runners on HRT, 30 runners not on HRT, 48 nonrunners on HRT, and 49 nonrunners 
not on HRT. Mailed questionnaires included a Menopausal Symptom Checklist, 
Menopause Attitude Scale, Sexual Response During Menopause Scale, and a 
General Well-Being Scale. A major finding was that women currently taking HRT 
perceived an increased severity and/or frequency of menopausal symptoms prior 
to beginning HRT as compared to those women not taking HRT; X2(1)=4.42; p<.05. 
None of the other study variables differed significantly among the groups. 
Regardless of the women's decision to take or not take HRT, more than 50% 
expressed concern regarding their decision. There was a conspicuous lack of 
relationship between menopausal symptomatology and running. Those providing 
health care for women need to be cognizant of the degree of discomfort that 
may be experienced by menopausal women, the lack of alleviation of these 
symptoms by exercise alone, and women's concerns over their HRT decision.


\\\\\
Menopausal Transition: The Learning Needs and Resources of Women in Midlife

Janice DeMasters

Every woman who lives long enough will experience the perimenopausal 
transition, a naturally occurring phenomena of female aging which bridges the 
time from the climacteric (or beginning of ovarian decline) through the first 
year after the cessation of menses (menopause). Women have cited inconsistent 
information and contrasting advice as a significant problems in this time of 
life. Considering these issues, identifying learning; needs and resources of 
this population is a crucial first step in the development of health promotion 
intervention strategies to facilitate positive adaptation through the 
perimenopause and into the menopausal years.

The purpose of this study is to investigate the learning needs of women during 
naturally occurring (as opposed to surgically induced) perimenopause; to 
discover what resources they perceive as available to them and which they 
utilize and what they perceive as deficits in information and support systems. 
Changes in these learning needs and resources from perimenopause to 
postmenopause are also addressed.

This ongoing study uses a grounded theory framework with a projected sample of 
20 women. A demographic questionnaire is used followed by a tape-recorded 
interview. The core theme emerging from the data is "relying on the familiar" 
as women turn to women's magazines, church publications and peer discussion as 
prime information resources and guidelines for establishing "norms." Support 
systems often center on peers who are also peri or postmenopausal. Emerging 
theory reveals a disturbing trend toward discontinuing routine gynecological 
checkups when health care providers discount or belittle women's symptoms and 
concerns. Mamograms are continued, however, because they do not require 
physician referral.


\\\\\
Psychometric Characteristics of an Adolescent Oral Contraceptive Belief Scale

Kathleen M. Hanna

A methodological study was conducted to develop a female adolescent oral 
contraceptive belief scale. A 42 item scale representing the constructs of 
perceived benefits and barriers was developed based upon qualitative data and 
review by adolescent experts and adolescents. The scale was voluntarily 
completed by 407 female adolescents (15 to 22 years of age) from family 
planning clinics. Item analysis (inter-item correlations, item to total 
correlations and contribution to alpha coefficient) was conducted and 18 items 
were deleted. Maximum likelihood factor analysis with varimax rotation yielded 
2 barrier factors (relationship oriented and oral contraceptive regimen 
barriers) and 4 benefit factors (relationship oriented, pregnancy prevention 
related to self, pregnancy prevention related to others, and personal 
responsibility benefits). The 6 factors accounted for 53% of variance. The 
alpha coefficients ranged from .71 to .87. The scale should be beneficial to 
further research on adolescents' oral contraceptive beliefs and use.


\\\\\
The Experiences of Post Menopausal Women with Coronary Artery Disease

Linda A. LaCharity

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a major cause of death among women and the 
incidence greatly increases after menopause. The purpose of this study was to 
gain insight into the experiences of post menopausal women after being 
diagnosed with CAD. The research was conducted from a feminist perspective, 
using audio taped in-depth interviews. Interviews were transcribed verbatim, 
then coded and analyzed using the computer program, The Ethnograph, version 4. 
Analysis focused on four major themes derived from the data: effects of the 
diagnosis, life style changes, support systems and strategies for coping and 
adapting to CAD. Informants' comments suggested a model for understanding the 
complex inter-relationships of women's experiences with CAD. Insights gained 
from this research included the role of household duties during the recovery 
period, the importance of realistic rates of life style change, the relevance 
of compromise in decision making, the value of support systems, and the 
importance of coping and adapting with a diagnosis of CAD.


\\\\\
Effects of Empathy on Appraisal, Coping, and Caregiving Outcomes in Informal 
Caregivers

Haejung S. Lee and Patricia F. Brennan

Statement of problem: The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of 
caregiver empathy on the appraisal of caregiving transaction, coping, and 
caregiving outcomes. Empathy has been identified as an important ingredient in 
professional helping relationships, but very little is known of the influence 
of empathy in caregiving. Attempts to examine the influence of empathy on the 
caregivers produced inconsistent results because of the conceptual and 
methodological problems. Using Lazarus and Folkman model, empathy is proposed 
as a critical personal characteristic which influences appraisal.

Theoretical Framework: To understand the positive or negative impacts of 
caregiving demands on caregivers, the stress model of Lazarus and Folkman was 
proposed. The model emphasizes cognitive appraisal which is determined by 
personal characteristics and mediates emotional and somatic reactions. In this 
study, empathy is posited to influence cognitive appraisal. Since cognitive 
appraisal rests on individual's subjective interpretation of a transaction, 
empathy has critical influence on the appraisal. This relationship will be 
examined.

Method: Using self-report questionnaires, 100 informal caregivers of elders 
aged over 60 will be recruited from the Greater Cleveland Arc Pearson 
correlation and multiple regression will be done to see the relationships 
between variables and the effects of empathy on the appraisals and outcomes.

Results: The poster will include descriptives of the variables, correlational 
matrix and multiple regression tables.

Implications: This study would trigger nursing intervention to facilitate 
caregiver's inner resource, such as empathy, to cope effectively with the 
caregiving environment, which enhances the possibility for the dependent 
elders to stay in the community.


\\\\\
Gender Comparisons of Functional Ability and Quality of Life One Year 
Following CABG

Shirley M. Moore

Because women have been shown to have reduced functional abilities following 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) as compared to men, understanding 
gender differences in perceived quality of life (QOL) is particularly 
important. Using Ferrans and Powers' multi-dimensional conceptualization of 
QOL, a correlational survey design was used to compare women's and men's 
functional ability and QOL 1 year following CABG. A convenience sample of 51 
individuals (20 women and 31 men) (mean age=66 yrs) who had undergone first 
CABG surgery 1 year previously, provided information about QOL using the 
Ferrans and Powers' Quality of Life Index and functional ability using the 
Sickness Impact Profile (SIP). Women reported worse physical functioning than 
men (F=9.62; p<.05) and the difference held after controlling for age. Using 
Analysis of Covariance and controlling for age, physical functioning, and 
social activities, no differences were found in women's and men's perceptions 
of QOL. Older persons perceived significantly better QOL (F=5.78; p<.05) and 
difficulty in physical functioning negatively influenced (F=5.7; p<.05) QOL. 
Multiple regression analyses indicated that age, existence of chronic 
problems, social functioning, physical functioning and gender together 
explained 31% of the variance in perceived QOL (F=5.14, p<.05). These findings 
suggest that although women report worse physical functioning than men, they 
may diminish the effects of adverse physical functioning on overall QOL.


\\\\\
Hope, Spirituality and Quality of Life of Non-Institutionalized Elderly

Sister Patricia Miller

There is a paucity of research on non-institutionalized elderly and strategies 
to promote their quality of life. The literature indicates that hope and 
spirituality are significant in the quality of life of persons with life 
threatening illness or death involvement. This study identifies the 
relationships between hope, spirituality and quality of life (QL) of 
non-institutionalized elderly. The sample was 75 persons over 65 years of age 
at five congregate meal sites for senior citizens. Subjects completed Oars 
Functional Assessment, Herth Hope Scale, Spiritual Perspective Scale (Reed), 
and Quality of Life Index (Ferras and Powers). Strong relationships 
(p<.01-p<.000) were found between hope and QL for Health, Socioeconomic, and 
Psychological/Spiritual dimensions. Spirituality was related it QL for the 
dimensions of Importance of Health and Satisfaction of Psychological/Spiritual 
dimensions (p<.04, p<.000). Hope and Spirituality were predictors for health 
(p<.000), Socioeconomic (p<.009), and Family (p<.032) dimensions of QL, with 
Hope the strongest predictor. Results indicate Hope and Spirituality be 
included in the strategies being developed and tested to promote QL for 
non-institutionalized elderly.


\\\\\
Perceived Health and Functional Status and Coping Measures of Individuals with 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Dianne M. Smolen

The purpose of this study is to investigate, from an outcome measurement 
standpoint, the perceived effect of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) on the 
health and functional status of affected individuals as well as the coping 
behaviors of these individuals. IBD, specifically Crohn's disease and 
ulcerative colitis, is a chronic, incurable condition causing pain, fever and 
weight loss. The literature reflects numerous studies discussing the impact of 
IBD on affected individuals (Kinash, et al., 1993; Love, et al., 1992). 
However, it does not discuss the perceived effect of IBD on the health and 
functional status of affected individuals from an outcome measurement 
standpoint. Outcomes are the results of effectiveness of health care delivery. 
Information is also scarce about coping behaviors of individuals with IBD in 
relation to the outcome measures of health and functional status (Kinash, et 
al., 1993). The concept of coping as defined by Lazarus (1980) is used as a 
framework for this descriptive, comparative study. The sample of at least 50 
patients will be drawn from patients who attend a gastroenterology clinic at a 
university teaching hospital. Data will be collected using the Health Status 
Questionnaire, the Jaloweic Coping Scale, and a researcher-designed 
Demographic Data Questionnaire. Data will be analyzed using descriptive 
statistics, ANOVA, and Pearson correlations. Information about how individuals 
with IBD cope successfully with their chronic illness may assist health 
professionals to support effective coping strategies.


\\\\\
Perceived Uncertainty, appraisal, and Hope in Women with Breast Cancer

Sharon A. Willadsen

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships among perceived 
uncertainty, appraisal of the event of breast cancer and hope in women with 
breast cancer.

The 50 subjects in the study was obtained from three outpatient oncology 
clinics. Respondents provided demographic and medically related information, 
scores on the Miller Hope Scale, the Mishel Uncertainty in Illness Scale, and 
an Appraisal Scale developed for this study.

The data were analyzed using descriptive and correlational statistics. 
Relationships between variables were established using Pearson correlation 
coefficients. Multiple regression, using stepwise regression, was employed to 
obtain the most significant predictors of hope as multicolinearity was not 
problematic. The alpha level was set at .05.

Significant negative correlations were found between hope and elevated 
perceptions of uncertainty (r=-.64) as well as elevated perceptions of 
ambiguity (r=-.55), complexity (r=-.69), inconsistency (r=-.50), and 
unpredictability (r=.31). The appraisal of breast cancer as an opportunity was 
strongly and statistically related to hope (r=.714).

Appraisal of breast cancer as an opportunity was found to be the best 
predictor of the level of hope in women with breast cancer. Decreased 
perceptions of uncertainty were also found to be predictive of hope. Together 
these two variables accounted for 56.9% of the variance in hope. Number of 
physical symptoms, time since diagnosis, and number of positive axillary nodes 
were found not to be significant predictors of hope.

The findings offer guidance in the design of nursing interventions to enhance 
the level of hope in women with breast cancer. To enhance a positive appraisal 
of the event of breast cancer experience, it is important to assist women to 
focus on a future that is possible and has rewards for them. Interventions are 
offered that provide this sense of future. To diminish the effects of 
perceived uncertainty on hopefulness, it is important to assist women in 
understanding breast cancer and its treatment. Providing consistent 
information, supporting efforts at coping, listening to, and validating 
feelings are ways nurses may be able to assist women in reevaluating the 
perceptions of uncertainty and its relationship to their experience with 
breast cancer.


\\\\\
Health and Educational Needs of Homeless Adolescents

Joyce Splann Krothe and Patricia N. Allen

In the last two decades the incidence of homeless adolescents has emerged as 
one of the most salient social problems in America. In 1989 the National 
Association of State Boards of Education focused national attention on the 
dangerous trends in adolescent health and the need to take action to reverse 
them in order to decrease health problems that interfere with learning. In 
1992 their publication Code Blue became the stimulus for communities, 
including Monroe County, Indiana, to organize task forces to respond to the 
findings of the study at the local level.

Homeless adolescents in any community present a multi-sectorial challenge. 
Their high-risk existence leads to individual morbidity and negatively impacts 
the health of the community. Identifying these adolescents and responding to 
their perceived needs becomes a shared responsibility for health care 
providers and educators. Using qualitative methods of key informant/homeless 
adolescent interviews, the research foci of this study included the following: 
(1) to identify homeless adolescents in Monroe County, Indiana; (2) to assess 
health and educational needs of the adolescents; and (3) to develop an 
interdisciplinary model for identifying homeless adolescents in other 
communities.

The findings of this study indicate that "homeless" is not the most accurate 
term to describe these adolescents. The descriptor "on their own" more 
accurately defines their living situation. Lack of access to primary health 
care was found to be a major factor affecting morbidity rates and in turn the 
adolescents ability to meet their educational needs. This paper will present 
the findings related to the health and educational needs assessment and 
provide suggestions for developing a model to identify adolescents living "on 
their own" in other communities. Implications for nursing's role in addressing 
their health care needs and implications for further study will be discussed.


\\\\\
How Children Perceive Their Neighborhood: A Survey of Inner City Elementary 
School Youth

Barbara J. Polivka, Barbara Smith, and Marian Lovell

Youth living in inner city areas are exposed to numerous potentially 
detrimental individuals and experiences. The purpose of this survey was to 
assess how inner city elementary school youths viewed their neighborhood. This 
study was based on the CDC community action framework for the prevention of 
youth violence in which community members develop violence prevention 
activities appropriate for their area. Individuals associated with an inner 
city elementary school determined that information was needed on youths 
perceptions of where they lived, played, and went to school. Subsequently, the 
Kidsplace survey was administered to 223 second to 5th graders and a modified 
version was given to 156 Kindergarten (K) and 1st graders. Students were asked 
to name (2nd-5th grade) or draw (K-1st grade) one person, place, or thing that 
select word reminded them of. Youth ranged in age from 5 to 12 and were 
primarily African-American (72%). Data were analyzed using content analysis. 
Thirty-six percent identified a violent event as making them sad ("when my dad 
got shot", "drive-bys"); 20% identified home or family as their source of 
sadness; 55% stated they felt safe at home or with family, while 11% 
identified school as the safest place. Forty-six percent of younger youth 
noted that home or family events were their source of happiness. Findings from 
this study can be used as a index to understanding how youth perceive their 
neighborhood and to plan future violence prevention interventions at the 
community level.


\\\\\
School-Age Child Behavior Outcomes of Prenatal Cocaine Exposure

V. Delaney-Black, Chandice Covington, T. Templin, R. Sokol, J. Ager, and S. 
Martier

Anecdotal reports from elementary teachers suggest that children exposed 
prenatally to cocaine demonstrate unique behaviors. While a projected one 
million exposed children will have entered the school system by 1995, no 
substantive data have been reported to validate these reports. A historical, 
prospective design was used to examine the influence of prenatal cocaine and 
alcohol exposures on child behaviors in the school setting. Maternal subjects 
(N=140) from a larger, prospective fetal research study were contacted and 116 
agreed to have their six year old singleton, term (> 36 weeks) child 
participate in this study. After informed consent, the mothers were 
interviewed by phone regarding demographic and SES factors and parental rating 
of child behavior. The child's first grade teacher, who was blinded to both 
study design and exposure status, rated the child's behavior with the Conners' 
Teacher Rating Scale, a 39-item instrument with reliability and validity that 
measures problem behaviors on a 4-point scale and an investigator-developed 14 
item, 10-point, visual analog scale, the PROBS, which measures behaviors 
posited to be specific to cocaine exposure. Significant positive relationships 
existed between cocaine exposure and prenatal maternal cigarette use and 
early, but not later, pregnancy alcohol exposure (p<0.05). A significant 
negative relationship existed between cocaine exposure and birth weight 
(p<0.05). After controlling for the influence of gender and alcohol exposure, 
the EXP group was assessed by teachers as demonstrating the problem behavior 
or "daydream" on the CTRS significantly more than the CONT group (one tailed, 
P=.02) and a significantly greater degree of problem behaviors on 5 of the 14 
PROBS items (distractibility, social skills, disorganization, transitions, and 
sensory overload; one tailed, (p<.05). On 12 of the 14 PROBS indicators of 
problem behaviors, the EXP group were rated higher than the CONT group (Wilkes 
O=.775, p=.027). This pilot study supports that teachers blinded to the 
exposure status of first grade students rated the EXP group as demonstrating 
significantly more problem behaviors than the CONT group. A larger, 
NIDA-funded study is underway to further delineate the influence of prenatal 
exposures on child school outcomes.


\\\\\
Urban School Nursing: Prevention, The Goal; Cultural Distinction, The 
Challenge

Sharon L. Pontious and D. Hecke

Current literature documents a urgent need for healthcare services to move 
from the acute care reactive model to the proactive community model of disease 
prevention and health promotion. Increasing access to healthcare facilitates 
services for people who are underserved and who may also be uninsured. Healthy 
Foundations (HF), a community initiated, multi-agency school health 
partnership was formed to provide health promotion disease prevention, 
education and referral services for 700 children and their families from a 
culturally distinct community. A cross-sectional descriptive study compared 
incidence rates of selected common school health problems with other 
comparative populations. There was a 2-4 times greater referral rate following 
vision, hearing and scoliosis screenings in this sample and a 10 times greater 
rate of immunization non-compliance. During the first year of the HF program, 
the incidence of pediculosis was markedly deceased, saving approximately 
10,640 educational hours and a shigella outbreak was contained through 
increased education, awareness and accessibility of free services. Success of 
the program is evidenced by an ardent request for expansion to include an 
additional 250 children who attend a large daycare and early childhood 
education program of the same ethnic orientation.


\\\\\\
Voices of Impoverished Brazilian Women: Health Implications of Roles and 
Resources

Joanne M. Hall

Long hours women spend in child care and house work occur in the informal 
sector and consist of a type of production that has been largely ignored by 
economists and politicians around the world. The non-remunerated work women do 
ensuring the maintenance and survival of their families is invisible, not 
counted in international labor force and income statistics. This qualitative 
interview study was undertaken with a group of 75 Brazilian women who live in 
an impoverished squatter community in the mountains surrounding a newly 
urbanized area near Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The convenience sample was 
recruited via door-to-door visitation by a bilingual U.S. nurse and a local 
key informant, the health post nurse. The purposes of the study were to 
describe women's role involvement in domestic and employment contexts, and 
assess personal and environmental resources. Content analysis yielded thematic 
descriptions of women's unrelenting work in the face of harsh social and 
economic environments, burdens of poverty, and role involvement characterized 
by disconnectedness, abuse, and lack of support by their partners. This 
confluence of constraints forced participants to be inwardly directed, relying 
on their intrapersonal resources of will, faith in God, patience, and 
self-deprivation to overcome great adversity and meet heavy role demands. 
Implications for the development of international resources and policies that 
can support impoverished women in maintaining their health and that of their 
families are discussed.


\\\\\
Dimensions of Informal Caregiving: A Meta-Ethnographic Comparison of HIV, 
Cancer, and Alzheimer Caregivers

Nancy R. Reynolds and Angelo A. Alonzo

The synthesis of research findings across population groups is important to 
knowledge development, however, little research comparing informal caregiving 
illness types has been executed, in part, because a number of the published 
accounts are qualitative. A meta-ethnographic technique (Noblit and Hare, 
1988) was used in this study to provide a comparative synthesis of qualitative 
research concerning HIV, Cancer and Alzheimer caregivers.

Thirty published qualitative research reports were located using database and 
historical search methods. For each study, interpretive themes, methods, 
sample size, caregiver age, relationship to patient and other variables were 
systematically evaluated by three independent coders (inter-rater agreement = 
90%) and thematically analyzed.

Common themes as well as critical differences were distinguished. While 
caregiving was identified as stressful across the studies, salient sources of 
stress varied from one population group to another. Preliminary findings 
suggest that reported differences in caregiving population group experiences 
not only reflect differential responses to the patient biophysical illness 
experience, but also to socially constructed metaphors and cultural images of 
different illness entities.


\\\\\
The Lived Experience of Rural Nurses: A Phenomenological Study

Judith Billings, J. Benz, S. Field, and C. Hadenfeldt

Approximately 17 percent of the practicing nurses in the United States work in 
rural areas. Several authors have described rural nursing, yet a description 
of rural nursing as it is lived by the rural nurse has not been systematically 
examined. The purpose of this descriptive phenomenological study was to 
describe the practice of registered nurses who are employed in rural hospital 
settings of 25 acute care beds or less. A purposive sample of 15 rural nurses 
was obtained. Interviews were tape recorded, transcribed verbatim, and 
subjected to descriptive phenomenological analysis using the methods developed 
by Colaizzi (Ornery, 1983).

Themes that emerged during analysis include: Diversity, Back-up, Relationships 
with coworkers, Dealing with the unexpected, and Caring for those you know. 
The nurses describe the diverse skills required in rural practice and what it 
is like to care for friends and neighbors. They reported "aloneness" and the 
necessity of having back-up help available to deal with the unexpected. 
Special relationships developed with coworkers.

An understanding of the unique challenges and difficulties facing rural nurses 
has implications for practice and education including the need for 
geographically accessible continuing education and the inclusion of rural 
content in nursing education programs.


\\\\\
Normalization: Reanalysis and Further Development of the Concept

Kathy Knafl, J. Deatrick, and C. Murphy Moore

Firsthand accounts, clinical observation, and numerous studies suggest that 
parents of children with chronic illness often strive to lead a normal family 
life in spite of their child's condition. Conceptualizing these efforts as 
normalization, researchers have identified cognitive and behavioral strategies 
used by parents to normalize family life (Knafl & Deatrick, 1986). Using the 
approach to concept development described by Morse (1995), the purpose of this 
paper is to further refine and develop the concept of normalization. Based on 
a comprehensive review of research-based and theoretical discussions of family 
response to childhood chronic conditions, the authors will verify abstract 
components of the concept that were identified in their original concept 
analysis of normalization (Knafl & Deatrick, 1986) and explore variations in 
how the concept is manifested across diverse family and illness situations.


\\\\\
Using Diaries to Assess Pain in Children with Sickle Cell Disease

Virginia E. Maikler, M. Broome, V. Ferguson, M. Davis, P. Bailey, K. Atoubi-
Danque, and G. Lea

Children with sickle cell disease experience considerable variability in the 
intensity and frequency of painful episodes, with most episodes managed at 
home. Little is known about their experiences. As part of a larger study, 46 
children, ages 6 to 12 years, from 2 Midwestern cities, completed daily pain 
diaries for seven weeks. Using the diary, children reported their pain 
intensity and location, pain management strategies, and school/social/home 
activities. Thirty-three (72%) of the children experienced pain every week. 
All required pharmacological interventions. Most children could attend school 
and other activities. Eight (17%) required contact with health care providers, 
and five (11%) were hospitalized. Positive relationships were found among pain 
reported, medication usage, and health care use. An inverse relationship was 
found between pain reports and activity. Several patterns of pain episodes 
emerged related to age and gender.


\\\\\
Managing Breast Self-Examination (BSE): Women's Perceptions of Coping 
Strategies

Julia F. Houfek and Cecilia R. Barron

The purposes of this study were to describe (a) women's perceptions of BSE, 
(b) strategies used to cope with BSE, and (c) differences in strategies among 
women with repressive and nonrepressive coping styles. A self-regulation 
framework guided the study. A convenience sample of 47 women participated in a 
semi-structured interview about their BSE experiences. Data were coded using a 
priori categories and those that emerged from the data. Major themes 
identified were (a) emotions involved in BSE practice, (b) difficulties 
associated with BSE health-care providers to find abnormalities, and (c) 
coping strategies for BSE including normalizing BSE and minimizing the impact 
of BSE. Differences in BSE management were identified according to coping 
style. Information about coping strategies can be used to develop 
interventions to increase BSE frequency and proficiency. Implications for 
practice include incorporating coping strategies during BSE teaching to help 
women regulate negative emotions. Research is needed to determine outcomes of 
the reported BSE coping strategies.


\\\\\
Perceived Barriers to Breast Cancer Services, Perceived Control in Health, and 
Perceived Risks to Breast Cancer of African American Women

Barbara A. Fowler

PROBLEM: African American women suffer at a disproportionately higher 
incidence and experience poorer prognosis for breast cancer survival compared 
to Caucasian women and other minority groups.

PURPOSE: To test the reliability and validity of an unidimensional scale 
measuring perceived barriers to breast cancer services, perceived control in 
health, and perceived risks to breast cancer of urban African American women.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK: The Health Belief Model and Health Locus of Control 
theory guided the study.

METHODOLOGY: Six experts reviewed the scale for content validity. Cronbach's 
alphas were used to determine internal consistency of the items. Factor 
analysis and Logistic regression were used to determine construct validity of 
the scale.

SAMPLE: N=104 African American women parishoners aged 40 and above. Half were 
married; most (98%) were under medical care of a physician; more than half 
(57%) received a mammogram during the last year; and most (98%) were referred 
by their physician for a mammogram.

RESULTS: Moderately high alphas were obtained on the subscales measuring 
perceived barriers to breast cancer services (.908) and perceived risks to 
breast cancer (.867). Factor analysis confirmed separate scales. Logistic 
Regression showed that barriers to breast cancer services predicted date of 
last mammogram (compliance) by a HCP (p<0.04).

IMPLICATIONS: Further research is warranted to identify barriers or other 
factors that may influence use of mammogram or clinical breast examination of 
African American women.


\\\\\
Prevalence, Characteristics, and Impact of Postmastectomy Pain Syndrome: An 
Investigation of Women's Experiences

Patricia E. Stevens

Postmastectomy pain (PMP), a distinctive, but poorly understood postsurgical 
neuropathic pain syndrome, results from injury to the intercostobrachial nerve 
during breast cancer surgery. It is thought to occur in 4 to 6% of axillary 
node dissections during lumpectomy, modified radical mastectomy, or radical 
mastectomy. The syndrome is under-studied and generally misdiagnosed. The 
purposes of this cross-sectional descriptive study were to determine PMP 
prevalence, describe the characteristics of the pain, and identify its impact 
on the lives of women with PMP. A convenience sample of 95 women oncology 
outpatients who had undergone breast cancer surgery was recruited from 16 
ambulatory care sites. Instruments included a medical record review form, 
patient information questionnaire, cancer pain questionnaire, and the McGill 
Pain Questionnaire. A 20% prevalence rate of postmastectomy pain syndrome was 
found, suggesting that PMP may affect considerably more women who have had 
breast cancer surgery than previously thought. Women experiencing the syndrome 
reported chronic, often severe pain of long duration. They had paroxysms of 
lancinating pain against a background of burning, aching, tight constriction 
in the axilla, medial upper arm, and/or chest that significantly interfered 
with performance of daily occupational and domestic activities. They were 
undertreated and their symptoms poorly relieved. Implications for surgical 
technique, diagnosis, treatment, and care are discussed.


\\\\\
Risk Factors for Attentional Deficits in Women Treated for Breast Cancer

Bernadine Cimprich

The ability to attend to self care activities is often altered in women 
treated for breast cancer, however, little is known about factors that might 
increase the risk of such impaired cognitive function. This study was 
conducted to determine whether age and extent of surgery might increase the 
risk of early loss of attention over the pre-surgical to pre-adjuvant therapy 
phase of illness in 39 women newly diagnosed with Stage I or II breast cancer. 
Subjects were assessed with a battery of measures of the capacity to direct 
attention (CDA) (Digit Span, Symbol Digit Modalities Test and Necker Cube 
Pattern Control) in the pre-surgical work-up period (Time 1) and again before 
the start of adjuvant therapy at about 3 weeks after surgery (Time 2). There 
was no differences in attentional performance by age (< 55 years vs. > 55 
years) or surgical (mastectomy vs. breast conservation) subgroups at Time 1. 
However, age and extent of surgery independently had significant influences on 
the pattern of attentional changes observed at Time 2. Older subjects (> 55 
years) (n=14) showed more severe attentional impairment than did younger 
subjects (n=25) at Time 2. Similarly, mastectomy patients (n=24), regardless 
of age, showed significantly greater losses in CDA at Time 2 as compared to 
subjects who had breast conserving surgery (n=15). Notably, pre-treatment 
attention scores were significantly positively correlated with post-surgical 
attention scores. Thus, the three independent variables, pre-treatment 
attentional performance, age and extent of surgery together accounted for 49% 
of the variance (Multiple R=.60, F=20.66, p=.0001) in attention scores at Time 
2. These findings suggest that older age, more extensive surgery and a 
compromised pre-treatment attentional state contribute to the severity of loss 
of attention following breast cancer surgery. The findings hold significant 
clinical implications for early therapeutic intervention aimed at improving 
cognitive function in women treated for breast cancer.


\\\\\
The Quality of Life of African-American Women with Breast Cancer

Laurel Northouse, L. Guziatek-Trojniak, L. Gatzke Schmidt, and S. West

Breast cancer poses a significant health threat to African-American women. 
They are often diagnosed with an advanced stage of breast cancer and their 
survival rates are significantly lower than Caucasian women. In spite of the 
negative effect that breast cancer can have on the health and well-being of 
African-American women, few studies have assessed their quality of life 
following the diagnosis of breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to 
examine the quality of life of African-American women with breast cancer. The 
study also assessed women's optimism, family functioning, symptom distress, 
current concerns, coping strategies, and overall appraisal of their illness. 
Oberst's framework of stress and coping provided the theoretical basis for the 
study. The sample consisted of 98 African-American women with breast cancer 
who were approximately 3 years (median) postdiagnosis. Multiple standardized 
instruments with established reliability and validity were used to measure 
study variables: Life Orientation Test, Family APGAR, Omega Screening 
Inventory, Brief COPE, Appraisal of Illness Scale and the FACT-B. Descriptive 
statistics, ANOVA and t-tests were used to assess study variables. The results 
indicated that this sample of African-American women had a relatively high 
quality of life when compared to other samples of cancer patients. Women with 
lower quality of life had a more advanced stage of cancer or a recurrence of 
their disease. The types of coping strategies most often used by women were 
emotional support, acceptance and religion. In general this sample of women 
was fairly optimistic, had good family functioning and little symptom 
distress. The implications of this study suggest that clinicians need to 
direct greater attention to African-American women with advanced or recurrent 
breast cancer because they are at risk of lower quality of life.


\\\\\
Catch-Up Growth in Premature Infants: Concept Clarification and Criteria for 
Clinical Assessment

Karen Pridham, Suzanne Thoyre, Naomi Rahn, Larry Desch, and Chin-Yu Lin

A better understanding of the concept of catch-up growth, regulating 
mechanisms, and means of evaluating it would aid nurses in more effectively 
supporting parents. In this study, catch-up growth was examined for 61 
premature infants (32 weeks or less gestational age at birth), all appropriate 
weight for gestational age with a history of lung disease. The extent to which 
the 22 infants weighing < 1000 g at birth and the 39 infants weighing at least 
1000 g at birth caught up in weight, length, and head circumference was 
examined through the first year, adjusting age for prematurity. Although some 
infants achieved 5th percentile growth, a frequently used catch-up growth 
criterion, this growth does not consider genetic potential and the infant's 
size relative to the family. The smallest infants were less likely to show 
catch-up growth, suggesting several potential regulating mechanisms. How the 
parents define catch-up growth and what they expect for their infant may be a 
factor in the efforts they make to support the infant's growth.


\\\\\
Clinical Testing of the Weaning Readiness Assessment Scale

Anne G. Perry and Patricia Dettenmeier

This was a prospective study designed to further test the Weaning Readiness 
Assessment Scale's (WRAS) ability to identify and categorize factors which 
impeded or promoted a patient's ability to successfully wean from mechanical 
ventilation (N=295). This phase of the study was designed to determine 1) the 
continuous reliability of the WRAS, 2) replication of the results on a larger 
prospective sample, and 3) if, through a linear regression model, there exists 
an interaction of multiple variables with one another and together to 
influence the number of days on mechanical ventilation.

As previously reported the WRAS is a 28 item, 60 point scale used to assess 
the patients' physiological, behavioral, and ventilatory variables. Previous 
research documents acceptable inter-rater reliability (0.93), intra-rater 
reliability (0.92), and content validity index (0.88). Earlier clinical 
testing identified a significance difference in the total scores of patients 
who successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation when compared to those 
patients who were unsuccessful. In addition 14 variables were identified as 
significant for successful weaning.

Preliminary one-way analysis of variance showed statistical significance on 
similar variables; and with other instances where statistical significance was 
not present, but where a trend was obvious in the means. Further analysis is 
in progress to complete contingency table analyses and to develop a linear 
regression model on the data from the two data sets for a total of 524 
subjects.

These data imply that certain variables, alone and in combination affect 
successful weaning from mechanical ventilation. Future testing of this model 
may reveal that the WRAS can be effective clinical assessment to identify 
readiness to wean.


\\\\\
Coping With The Stress of Premature Labor

Ann Herman Lowenkron

Premature birth, the leading cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality in the 
United States, affects between 8% and 12% of all live births. Approximately 
80% of premature births are proceeded by premature labor. Significant progress 
has been made in physical treatments to suppress premature labor, however, the 
psychological cost to women being treated had yet to be studied 
systematically. The purpose of this study was to assess the stress experienced 
by women treated at home for premature labor and to examine methods used by 
the women to cope. The theoretical framework was provided by Lazarus's model 
of Stress, Coping and Emotion. A total of 50 women participated. Twenty 
responded to a questionnaire that included the Perceived Stress Scale, the 
Ways of Coping Questionnaire, the Revised Health Locus of Control Scale, 
Rosenberg's Self-Esteem Scale, the Sense of Mastery Scale and the MOS Social 
Support Survey only, 10 were interviewed only; and 20 completed the 
questionnaire and interview. Results: The women reported experiencing a 
moderate among of stress. Their mean stress score was 26.75, just below the 
mean for the instrument (M=28). Appraisal was assessed by analyzing data from 
interviews. The women appraised their situation as both threatening and 
challenging. They described their emotional response as frustration because of 
fear about pregnancy outcome, loss of control over their life, and inability 
to perform usual roles. Strategies from the Ways of Coping questionnaire 
subscales of Seeking Social Support, Planful Problem-Solving and Positive 
Reappraisal were used to cope. The women reported an external locus of 
control, a high sense of master, and high self-esteem. High Expectancy of 
Control (a variable created by combining measurements of locus of control, 
sense of mastery, and self-esteem), and the buffering effect of social support 
served to modify the coping process.


\\\\\
Factors Related to Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy

Glenda N. Lindseth

Greater than 50,000 women in the U.S. alone are hospitalized for nausea and 
vomiting in pregnancy (Hintilian, 1993), and an approximate four million 
pregnant women will experience some form of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy 
(NVP) each year. While early (< 20 weeks) of NVP may be associated with 
positive outcomes, the outcomes of late (> or = 20 weeks) of NVP are less 
certain and have been associated with decreased birth weight and dehydration 
of the mother. This study, conceptualized with Orem's Theory of Self-Care 
Deficit, analyzes those factors that may be related to experiences of NVP. 
Nausea and vomiting experience scores of 50 randomly selected pregnant women 
were determined by using the Rhodes Nausea and Vomiting Symptom Distress Scale 
and compared to demographic, anthropometric, and dietary intake variables for 
each subject. Self-care agency and quality of life scores were also measured 
for relationships to the nausea and vomiting experiences. When comparing 
dietary intakes of groups of women experiencing NVP and those women 
asymptomatic for NVP, significant differences emerged between nutrient intakes 
of ascorbic acid (F=5.1, p=.05), kilo calories (F=7.3, p=.02), cholesterol 
(F=79.2, p<.001), protein (F=6.1, p=.03), carbohydrate (F=23.3, p.001), and 
fat (F=18.3, p=.002). There were NS differences in NVP experience scores for 
early pregnancy when compared to late pregnancy, yet anthropometric measures 
differed significantly when considering the nausea and vomiting. Several other 
significant demographic and health risk variables emerged. This study has 
implications for developing nursing interventions to improve the health and 
wellbeing of pregnant women who may be experiencing nausea and vomiting.


\\\\\
Predictors of Psychological Well-Being During Pregnancy: A Comparison of 
Canadian and U.S. Women

Rachel Zachariah

The purpose of this study was to explore the phenomena of attachment 
relationships and social support of women during pregnancy and their influence 
on their psychological well-being. The attachment with one's mother was 
perceived as prototype for later relationships and social interactions, which 
also influence the individual's psychological well-being (Bowlby, 1988). The 
study design represented passive observational approach. The sample consisted 
of 115 Canadian and 118 U.S. women who were married, living with husbands, 
between 18 and 39 years of age, expecting their first liveborn infant, 28 
weeks or greater gestation, and without any medical conditions. Multiple 
correlational and regression techniques were used to analyze data derived from 
self-completed structured questionnaires. The hypothesis that mother-daughter 
and husband-wife attachment have positive correlations, was supported for both 
samples (Canadian, r=.24 P<.01; U.S., r=.7956, P<.001). Mother-daughter, 
husband-wife attachment, and the age of the subject accounted for 36% of the 
total variability in psychological well-being for the Canadian sample. For the 
U.S. sample, 8% of the total variability in psychological well-being was 
explained by life-stress, emotional support and total number in the network. 
The fundings of the Canadian study confirmed that the attachment relationships 
with mother and husband had an impact upon the woman's psychological 
well-being. For the U.S. sample, however, the significant predictors of 
psychological well-being were life-stress, emotional support and total number 
in the network. The significant positive correlation between mother-daughter 
and husband-wife attachment during pregnancy is an important finding in 
planning for care and identifying risks in the emotional health of women 
during pregnancy.


\\\\\
Acute Confusion in Hospitalized Elderly Veterans

Bonnie Wakefield

This study will establish estimates of the prevalence, incidence, risk factors 
for and short term outcomes of acute confusion (AC) in hospitalized elderly 
veterans (HEV). The specific aims are to: 1) establish estimates of the 
prevalence and incidence of AC in HEV; 2) identify risk factors associated 
with the incidence of AC in HEV; 3) determine whether patients with AC during 
hospitalization experience more adverse outcomes while hospitalized, compared 
to non-confused patients; and 4) determine whether the clinical and resource 
outcomes are different between patients experiencing AC during hospitalization 
compared to non-confused patients. The ultimate goal of this study is to 
develop a better understanding of the nature, extent, and clinical and 
resource importance of AC in HEV.

The study uses a prospective cohort design, with a sample drawn from patients, 
age 65 and older admitted to 1 of 3 medical wards at a midwestern VAMC, who 
have a predicted length of stay greater than 48 hours. Within 24 hours of 
admission, eligible patients are screened. Following consent procedures, 
eligible patients are assessed with the MMSE, NEECHAM scale for acute 
confusion, Geriatric Depression Scale, and the Clock Drawing Test. Demographic 
data, risk factors, and outcomes are collected on admission and during the 
course of the subject's stay in the hospital. Patients are followed for 8 days 
following admission; patients confused on admission or who become confused 
during their hospital stay are assessed daily until the confusion clears or 
discharge. At three and six months after discharge, VA records will be 
reviewed for data on mortality and readmissions. Data analysis will include 
descriptive statistics, calculation of prevalence and cumulative incidence 
rates, odds ratios, multiple logistic regression, ANOVA, and Chi-square.


\\\\\
Acute Confusion in Elderly Long-Term Care Veterans: A Pilot Study

Kennith Culp, Bonnie Wakefield, Karen Wadle, and Jackie Akins

This study was designed to test data collection procedures to establish the 
incidence of acute confusion (AC) among elderly veterans who live in long term 
care (LTC) settings. Specific aims were to: 1) test instruments to assess AC 
in this setting; 2) identify the most common risk factors associated with AC; 
and 3) estimate clinical profiles of acutely confused veterans in LTC. Using a 
longitudinal design and incorporating diurnal patterns of acute confusional 
states into the methodology, both evening and daytime assessments of cognitive 
functioning were completed. Subjects were screened with the mini-mental state 
exam. We then administered instruments specific to AC and measured intake and 
output, daily ratings of sleep and pain, serum electrolytes, and oxygen 
hemoglobin saturation with a non-invasive pulse oximeter. Subjects were deemed 
eligible if they were: 1) 65 years of age or older, 2) not located on a 
residential care unit, and 3) did not have a psychiatric diagnosis (with the 
exception of substance abuse). Of those deemed eligible, 36 subjects agreed to 
participate from two VA institutions. Using a NEECHAM score < 24 as the case 
ascertainment criteria, 15 subjects (41.2%) experienced acute confusion during 
the observation period. Possible antecedent conditions for these episodes 
include urinary tract infection, serum electrolyte imbalance, hypotension, 
hypoxia, and medication-induced delirium. The probable etiologies for these 
events suggest clinical implications for vigilant monitoring of high-risk 
residents in LTC, comprehensive staff education for assessment, and prevention 
strategies to offset the occurrence of fluid and electrolyte imbalances.


\\\\\
Assessment and Treatment Strategies for Acute Confusion Used in Iowa Veterans 
Affairs Facilities

James D. Waterman and Mary Kundrat

In order to determine current strategies used by nursing staff a 4 Iowa VA 
facilities to assess, prevent, and treat confusion as well as to identify the 
most pressing nursing management problems associated with acute confusion, an 
open-ended questionnaire was completed by 578 nursing staff members. Responses 
were clustered by obvious fit under appropriate codes from NANDA, Nursing 
Interventions Classification (NIC), ICD-9, and DSM-IV. Inter-rater reliability 
for coding was 80-96%. Common nursing care problems related to acute confusion 
included alteration in thought processes, at risk for violence and injury, and 
self-care deficit. Nervous disorders and electrolyte imbalance were the most 
frequently reported medical diagnoses. The most common assessment techniques 
were orientation checks and observation and only 11% used any published mental 
status exam for acute confusion. Interventions most frequently cited as 
effective were coping assistance, cognitive therapy, and communication 
enhancement. Ineffective interventions included reality orientation, poor 
communication, and physical and chemical restraints. This survey provided 
baseline data indicating that acute confusion is a major clinical problem for 
nursing staff at VA facilities, that there are numerous divergent views 
regarding its definition, and considerable ambiguity regarding its nursing 
management.


\\\\\
Training of Acute Confusion Resource Nurses: Knowledge, Efficacy and Role

Carla Gene Rapp, Karen Wadle, and Marge Hedstrom

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of an educational program 
on participants' knowledge of acute confusion and their level of confidence in 
assessing acutely confused patients. The first phase of the acute 
confusion/delirium study identified a need for education of staff regarding 
etiology, differentiation between delirium and dementia, and assessment 
protocols for delirium. Each participating facility identified unit-based 
resource nurses willing to develop expertise in the assessment of acute 
confusion using the mini- mental state exam (MMSE), the NEECHAM confusion 
scale, and the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). Eighty-five resource nurses 
participated in an 8 hour workshop with both didactic and experiential 
components. Using a theoretical framework of self-efficacy, nurses first 
observed and then participated in role plays to gain skill and confidence in 
assessing acutely confused patients. The resource nurse is prepared to 
function in the role of expert in the assessment of acute confusion, and to 
develop the skills of peers in assessing acute confusion. A 12 item test 
related to knowledge of acute confusion and a 10 item assessment of perceived 
level of confidence in assessing acutely confused patients was administered 
before and after completion of the program. Data were analyzed using a series 
of descriptive and inferential statistical procedures. Following the day-long 
workshop, field checks were done at each participating facility with 85% of 
the participants. The 88 participants showed significant (p<.05) improvement 
in knowledge and level of confidence after the educational intervention.


\\\\\
Centering Pregnancy: A Model for Group Prenatal Care

Marjorie J. Smith and Sharon S. Rising

Traditional prenatal care involves assessment of the mother/fetus dyad's 
progression as well as screening for problems in one-to-one visits throughout 
pregnancy. Education for childbirth and parenting is fragmented and sporadic. 
In the Centering Pregnancy Model, care is taken out of examination room and 
placed within a large conference room where women receive their basic prenatal 
assessment, talk informally, and learn about pregnancy, birth, and parenting. 
The 9 sessions during pregnancy and 1-2 postpartum are led by a nurse-midwife 
or nurse practitioner who also coordinates the assessment component. Women are 
grouped roughly by due dates and gather for prenatal visits every 2-4 weeks. 
At these visits, standard prenatal risk assessment is done, health promotion 
and education follow that utilize an instructional and discussion format, and 
time is provided for women to talk. By incorporating these 3 components of 
risk assessment, education, and support in all visits, each is given equal 
emphasis. Assessment and evaluation tools are used throughout the sessions. 
Outcomes in terms of maternal and newborn morbidity are comparable to women 
who received traditional care in the same setting. 96% of the women preferred 
their care in a group.

Focus groups, used to supplement the project evaluation, were held with three 
groups of mothers, a group of clinic nurses, a group of in-patient nurses, and 
with a social worker and physical therapist after 15 groups (N=113) had 
completed the program. Interview questions were based on the objectives of the 
Centering Pregnancy Program, its advantages and disadvantages, and changes 
participants would recommend. Results indicated overwhelming satisfaction on 
the part of all involved. The participants developed a group identity where a 
connection is made between the women, and between the staff and the women, 
that is supportive, strengthening and affirming. The women felt special, 
learned about themselves and their baby, and felt empowered by the process. 
Nurses and resource personnel strongly supported the program for the benefits 
to patients--"every patient should have this kind of care"--and believed that 
the program provided an opportunity to practice nursing as they desired. The 
program also proved to be cost effective and time efficient for both the staff 
and for the mothers. This innovative health care program can improve prenatal 
care for childbearing women.


\\\\\
Home Visits for Drug Addicted Childbearing Women

Linda Beth Tiedje, Claudia Holzman, and Dorothy Pathak

Treatment programs for alcohol, tobacco, and other drug-using pregnant women 
are generally ineffective because of a focus that is male oriented and because 
emphasis has been primarily on fetal outcomes. This paper examines women's 
addiction to alcohol and other drugs using a feminist theoretical framework 
and reviews research on the importance of relationships in the etiology of 
women's drug-use behavior. Recent studies have suggested that home visit 
interventions are particularly well suited for drug abuse treatment for 
addicted childbearing women (Black, et al., 1994; Finkelstein, 1994; Starn, et 
al., 1994). The purpose of the paper will be: a) to propose an intervention 
model based on home visits and framed in the context of women's relationships; 
b) to describe common characteristics of successful home visit programs to 
addicted childbearing women; and c) to outline a randomized clinical trail to 
more rigorously test one particular home visit program. Recommendations 
summarizing the usefulness and possible cost effectiveness of home visit 
interventions to drug addicted childbearing women will also be made.


\\\\\
Providing Support to Hospitalized Pregnant Women on Bedrest: Methods and 
Emerging Themes

Barbara F. Ponder and Judith A. Maloni

As many as 20% of all pregnant women are bedrested at some time during their 
pregnancies. Bed rest engenders multiple financial, emotional, and physical 
costs to the woman and her family. As a result women find themselves with 
insufficient methods for coping with this situation. This presentation will 
describe: a) provision of supportive group c?re to pregnant bedrested women 
hospitalized in a perinatal referral center; and b) results of a dimensional 
analysis (Schatzman, 1992; Strauss, 1987) of the process recordings of each 
group session over a period of 18 months. The following provisional dimensions 
of the antepartum bedrest experience emerged from ongoing data collection and 
analysis: Disturbing Emotions, Balancing Family Needs and Role Reallocations, 
Forced Dependence/Confinement. Isolation, and Conflict regarding health of 
self and fetus. The dimensionS will be used to develop a conceptual framework 
to guide nursing practice and research of the hospitalized pregnant woman.


\\\\\
What are the Barriers, Satisfaction, Prenatal Care Utilization and Birth 
Outcomes of Low Income Rural Pregnant Women?

Mildred A. Omar and Rachel Schiffman

Improving the outcome of pregnancy is a national priority. Rural areas with 
high concentrations of families in poverty often have limited access to health 
care with many pregnant women receiving less than adequate prenatal care. 
Researchers maintain that barriers and satisfaction have been linked to 
service usage and health outcomes of mother and infants. King's framework 
guided this study of the perceptions of pregnant women. The purpose was to: a) 
describe the barriers and satisfaction with prenatal care as perceived by 
rural low income women; b) describe the pattern of health care utilization of 
rural low income women; c) describe the relationship between the barriers, 
satisfaction with adequacy of prenatal care; and d) describe the relationships 
between barriers, adequacy, and maternal and infant outcomes. The Ten-Item 
Checklist, Patient Satisfaction with Prenatal Care instrument, Adequacy of 
Prenatal Care Index, Maternal Health Care Utilization Survey and medical 
record review were utilized. The convenience sample with consists of 60-75 
rural pregnant women receiving prenatal care from various providers. 
Descriptive statistics will be calculated. Associations between barriers, 
satisfaction, and adequacy of prenatal care and between barriers, adequacy and 
outcomes will be analyzed by analysis of variance. Preliminary findings 
indicate that travel and distance were perceived as barriers and that 
satisfaction was derived from a caring provider. Accessing care was perceived 
as both a barrier and an area of dissatisfaction. Implications for nursing 
practice include provision of prenatal care in county by Advanced Nurse 
Practitioners, redefining patterns of prenatal care, and coordination and 
collaboration with other providers to increase rural women's knowledge and 
access to prenatal care services.


\\\\\
Charted Nursing Interventions Grouped by Nursing Interventions Classification 
(NIC) Compared Classified Medicus Indicators and Defined Functional Care 
Categories for Patients on Total Hip Replacement (DRG 209) and PTCA (DRG 112) 
Clinical Pathways

L. Sue Davis, Linda L. Workman, and Darlene A. Anderson

This study was undertaken in conjunction with a larger, multi-institutional 
consortium research project to validate nursing interventions in support of 
the NIC and Medicus indicators, and the direct care costs based on these 
intervention. A descriptive design examined the relationship between a patient 
classification system (Medicus Type VI) acuity score and documented nursing 
interventions for patients participating in a clinical pathway for DRGs 209, 
total hip replacement, and 112, PTCA. A random sample of 40 patient medical 
records was obtained from a 707 bed academic medical center located in a 
midwestern state. Data were collected using a coding instrument developed by 
the researchers which incorporated revised Medicus acuity indicators, nursing 
interventions categories (NIC) derived from the Iowa Intervention Project, and 
nursing interventions based on standards of care and the clinical pathways 
expectations. Descriptive statistical analysis was completed using an 
analytical tree concept with the documented nursing interventions as the basis 
for generating NIC and Medicus scores. In addition, Medicus categories coded 
daily by the staff nurse were transformed into two binary codes, 0=absent and 
1=present, to enable comparison of documented to coded Medicus indicators per 
patient group. Results revealed that nursing interventions were found to 
support both NIC and Medicus categories and clinical pathways standards 
established for the 2 DRGs.


\\\\\
Translating Nursing Orders into the Nursing Interventions Classification 
(NIC): Process and Rules

Sue Moorhead and Connie Delaney

Uniform language in nursing is needed to clearly depict the contributions of 
nursing in the health care arena. Standardized language provides a way to 
describe nursing care, to determine nursing's contribution to outcomes and to 
measure the quality of that contribution to patient care. Standardized 
language for nursing diagnoses is commonly used in nursing practice and 
provides a framework for evaluation of care, but little data related to 
nursing interventions and patient outcomes are standardized. This situation in 
nursing practice today limits out ability to describe nursing practice and the 
patient outcomes achieved in spite of the fact that many hospitals collect 
these data. This study integrates the feasibility of translating 
nonstandardized nursing intervention data into standardized intervention 
language using the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC). The study is 
based on data from a midwest community hospital's computerized information 
system. A method for translating the nursing orders from the discharge records 
of 4,248 patient records from April through October 1990 was developed that 
aligned each nursing order with the appropriate nursing intervention from the 
NIC. The rules created for this translation will be outlined. Examples of 
nursing interventions linked to NANDA diagnoses identified as a result of this 
translation process provide a "picture" of nursing practice in this hospital 
that was not available previously. The results of this study demonstrate that 
nonstandardized nursing orders can be translated into standardized nursing 
intervention language such as the Nursing Interventions Classification.


\\\\\
Translating Nursing Interventions from a Hospital System to the Nursing 
Interventions Classification (NIC)

Amy Coenen, Polly Ryan, and Janice Sutton

The use of standardized classification systems to document nursing practice 
can assist in demonstrating the contributions nurses make in the health care 
arena. The purpose of this project was to compare an existing classification 
system for interventions that was used in a hospital Nursing Information 
System (NIS) with the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC) (McCloskey & 
Bulechek, 1992). This initial project was necessary in order to conduct a 
multi-site study describing nursing care using the Nursing Minimum Data Set 
(NMDS). The hospital NIS classified interventions using the NMDS 16 category 
scheme. For future comparability of translation projects, nursing 
interventions for this project were selected based on the Moorhead and Delaney 
project (another presentation for this symposium). Interventions for select 
nursing diagnoses were used. Members of the research team independently coded 
the select interventions from the hospital NIS to the NIC. Most of hospital 
NIS interventions were comparable at the level of NIC activities, in which 
case the NIC intervention label was used for coding. Alpha levels were < .60 
on coding for the first diagnosis (pain). After determining decision rules for 
additional coding, interventions for pain will be re-coded until an alpha 
level of > .90 is achieved. At that time, interventions for additional 
diagnoses will be translated from the hospital NIS to NIC. Based on the 
findings, a discussion of issues related to development and use of 
classification systems for nursing interventions will be presented.


\\\\\
Translation Technique: Rules and Issues for Translating Nursing 
Orders/Interventions to Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC)

Connie Delaney and Sue Moorhead

Nursing is straddling a faultline between the past and the information age. 
Present day incorporation of standardized nursing language into computerized 
nursing information systems gives nursing a new power to describe practice and 
determine its contribution to health care delivery. However, this strategy 
does not allow nursing to use clinical data stored prior to the development of 
standardized language. This thus obscures a comparison of the present with the 
past. The purpose of this paper is to compare and contrast three diverse, 
independently developed methods for translating nursing orders/interventions 
into the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC). Based on a synthesis of 
these methods, a technique for translating non-standardized nursing 
orders/interventions into the NIC will be presented. Decision rules and issues 
inherent within the rules will be discussed.


\\\\\
Attitudes of Rural Nurses Toward HIV/AIDS

Carol H. Pullen and M. C. Petersen

With the incidence of HIV/AIDS steadily increasing in rural areas, both with 
newly diagnosed cases and persons "coming home to die", nursing care issues in 
rural communities need to be addressed. Previous research has indicated that 
as knowledge about HIV/AIDS and its related issues increase and as attitudes 
become more positive, nurses were more willing and less fearful to care for 
persons with AIDS. The unique characteristics of rural areas may pose 
additional challenges for caring for HIV/AIDS patient in the rural health care 
delivery system. The purpose of this study was to describe the attitudes of 
rural nurses towards HIV/AIDS (in the areas of homosexuality, IV drug users, 
women, nursing care, and social issues) and to determine the relationship of 
age, educational level, AIDS education, experience in care delivery to 
HIV/AIDS patients, and willingness to care for HIV/AIDS patients. A 
descriptive correlational design is being used to collect data from a 
convenience sample of approximately 300 rural nurses (data collection 
progress) attending continuing education programs at 16 rural sites throughout 
the state. Written surveys include a personal data form including selected 
items relating to AIDS education and willingness to care for HIV/AIDS patients 
and Preston's "Opinions About HIV/AIDS and People with AIDS". Data analysis 
will include descriptive statistics, correlation measures, and ANOVAs to 
assess group differences. This study will provide a foundation for the 
development of educational interventions for rural nurses tailored to the 
areas of greatest need (i.e., homosexuality, IV drug users) and to specific 
subgroups of nurses.


\\\\\
The Characteristics, Drug Use, and Program Participation of 221 Registered 
Nurses Referred to a Peer Assistance Program for Alcohol and Drug Problems

Judy Williams, L. Finke, and R. Stanley

Many states have established peer assistance programs to help chemically 
impaired nurses. Information about nurses referred to these program sis 
essential to program development and to the development of primary prevention 
strategies; however, little research has been done on nurses referred to these 
programs. The purpose of this descriptive study was to identify the nurse 
characteristics and other variables that were significantly related to nurses; 
participation in the program. Over three-quarters of the nurses used drugs. 
The highest percentage of nurses used narcotics. Over one-third of the nurses 
had diverted drugs for their own use. Thirty-nine percent (39%) of the nurses 
studied had been reported to the state board of nursing and 27% had received 
disciplinary action. Over half of the referred group successfully completed 
the peer assistance program. Marital status and referral source were 
significant indicators of program participation. Nurses who were married and 
nurses who were referred by a health care provider, such as a physician or 
counselor, were more apt to have graduated from the program. Additional 
research is needed to develop assistance programs and prevention strategies.


\\\\\
The Ethics of Transforming Research into Story for the General Public

Susan Diemert Moch

Transforming qualitative research into easily readable story for the general 
public involves many ethical considerations. Human subject review for the 
research demands anonymity and confidentiality. The researcher guarantees such 
in the Consent Form. Yet, readable story involves detail, specifics and 
interesting quotes.

Ethical questions are discussed in light of research on breast cancer at 
midlife (Moch, 1990) becoming Breast Cancer: Twenty Women's Stories (1995). 
The book is a compilation of readable stories for consumption by the general 
public. Some of the important ethical questions surrounding the transformation 
from research to story include: "How much detail about participants can be 
included in the story?", "Should participants give permission before 
publication of the story?" and "Who gives permission if the participant dies 
before publication?"


\\\\\
Identification of Professional Values in Institutional Philosophies of Nursing

Mary Jane Schank, D. Weis, and J. Ancona

A nursing philosophy represents the value system of the profession, providing 
direction for the practice of nursing and the development of the profession. 
The nursing administrator creates the climate of nursing practice by 
formalizing and operationalizing professional nursing values. The values are 
enumerated in a philosophy of nursing document from which priorities are set, 
standards developed, and resources allocated. The purpose of this study was to 
describe which values articulated in the ANA Code for Nurses (1985) were 
reflected in the philosophy of nursing documents of 10 health care 
institutions. The institutions ranged in size from 87 to 700 licensed beds. 
Content analysis was employed to identify value themes in the ANA Code for 
Nurses (1985). Each institutional philosophy was examined for the presence of 
these Code themes. A binary index was created to systematically record the 
presence or absence of the themes. The number of themes in each philosophy was 
enumerated according to the individual Code value statements. The philosophy 
documents were found to reflect Code values ranging from one statement in one 
philosophy to seven statements reflected in three philosophies. None of the 
philosophies contained themes reflecting all eleven Code statements. Every 
philosophy reflected the dignity and worth of individual humanness (Code 
statement #1). Code statement #10 (protecting the public) was not reflected in 
any philosophy.


\\\\\
Measuring the Impact of Reengineering on Patient Care Delivery

Barbara Pillar

In order to meet the demands of delivering quality health care in a time of 
cost containment, many hospitals have undertaken reengineering. Reengineering 
is defined as the fundamental rethinking and radical redesign of processes to 
achieve dramatic improvements in critical and timely measures of performance. 
In an 800 bed, urban, acute care hospital, the effect of reengineering on 
patient outcomes is being evaluated through a two year prospective study of 
change in the structure of the hospital and in the processes of delivering 
care. Outcomes include 1) patient care methods, to be documented by new skill 
mix, roles, operations, support services, information systems; 2) standards of 
operation, to be documented by benchmarks; 3) authority and autonomy of the 
nurse, assessed through nurse survey; and 4) commitment to patient focused 
care, also surveyed through nurseself report. Quality of care will be 
evaluated by changes in length of stay, number of adverse events, patient 
satisfaction, physician satisfaction, nurse satisfaction, and Medicus quality 
measures. Efficiency will be measured by workload, productivity, and cost. 
Sampling for this repeated measures design links patients and nurses to allow 
measurement of change as roll out proceeds in the organization. This poster 
presentation will describe the development of the study design, methods, and 
data collection instruments. Baseline data and preliminary results will also 
be presented.


\\\\\
Organizational Dimensions of Hospital Nursing

Patricia A. Martin, P. Risner, T. Gustin, G. Jordan, L. Cox, and T. Lupo

PROBLEM. The project was designed to improve understanding of the following 
dimensions: organizational climate, professional practice climate, work 
satisfaction, professional nursing autonomy, and communication satisfaction. 
Prior to this study, most of the dimensions had not been studied 
longitudinally in one setting to determine sensitivity to organizational 
change.

SAMPLE. The approximately 1200 RN staff were sampled at seven data collection 
times from December 1990 to January 1995 with a 10-15% response rate each time 
yielding 1217 questionnaires.

METHODOLOGY. Psychometrically sound instruments were selected and printed in 
survey booklets. Data were collected each time in a single day at 4 one-hour 
sessions. Analysis was descriptive and inferential (eg. MANOVA, multiple 
regression) using SAS 6.0.

RESULTS. The work satisfaction dimensions show short-term response but 
organizational climate measures found sustained differences.

IMPLICATIONS. Decision making demands knowledge of the properties of the 
measurement to interpret findings.
