\\\\\
Determinants of Motivation in Regular Physical Exercise: A Test of the 
Wellness Motivation Nursing Theory in Older African Americans

Julie Fleury, Joanne Harrell, Carol Hogue, and Barbara Ainsworth

Numerous studies have demonstrated the benefit of habitual physical activity 
in unproving health, reducing the incidence of coronary heart disease, and 
increasing longevity and quality of life. Continued physical activity offers 
tangible benefits to physically capable older adults, primarily in reducing 
the risk of physical impairment and mortality. Understanding motivation to 
initiate and sustain health behavior change is an essential step in developing 
a lasting program of regular physical activity in those at highest risk for 
chronic illness. The purpose of this pilot study was to identify motivational 
predictors of the initiation and maintenance of regular physical activity in 
older Africna Americans. The study serves as a test of a motivation theory and 
provides a basis for understanding health issues and cultural preferences of 
minority persons at risk for chronic illness.

The pilot study had two phases. In phase I of the study, community-based focus 
groups were convened to determine the cultural meaning and relevance of 
motivational concepts as well as plans for subject recruitment and pilot study 
protocol. Sections from data collection instruments were reviewed to ensure 
readability, comprehension and relevance to intended participants. Based on 
the responses of the focus groups, standardized interview schedules and 
response formats were developed to facilitate data collection with a sample of 
elderly African Americans. In phase II of data collection, one hundred African 
American men and women over the age of 60 were recruited from Community Action 
programs in rural North Carolina. Subjects were recruited to evaluate 
motivational determinants of regular physical activity so as to provide a 
cross sectional evaluation of predictors of physical activity. Subjects 
completed an interview schedule at one point in time which included measures 
of cultural context, appraisal of readiness to initiate physical activity, 
self-regulation in the maintenance of physical activity, and patterns of 
physical activity. Both phases in the data collection were completed by May, 
1995.

This presentation will focus on describing which variables in a model of 
wellness motivation are significant predictors of regular physical activity in 
older African Americans. The goals are to augment knowledge of effective, 
feasible and acceptable strategies to maintain the cardiovascular health of 
older adults and prevent chronic illness through regular physical activity; 
and to lay the groundwork for further theory specification and testing.


\\\\\
A Nursing Support Intervention with Mothers of Preterm Infants

Diane Holditch-Davis, Margaret S. Miles, Anne Fishel, Harriet Boone, Charlotte 
Gilbert-Evans, and Lloyd Edwards

Premature infants are at risk for later chronic health and developmental 
problems. Effective health and early intervention programs are available, but 
mothers of prematures do not consistently use these services because of 
unresolved issues from their infants' NICU stay and family problems. The 
purpose of this pilot study is to examine the feasibility of an intervention 
providing support to these mothers after hospital discharge. This intervention 
is designed to supplement existing well-child and developmental services by 
providing parental support that is usually not part of these services. Four 
specific research questions will be addressed: 1) the feasibility of the 
intervention, 2) the effect of the intervention on the use of services, 
maternal psychological wellbeing, and quality of the social environment, 3) 
the effect of the intervention on issues from the NICU, and 4) the specific 
activities performed at each contact.

Forty mothers and their high-risk premature infants will be recruited shortly 
before discharge and followed until the infants are 6 months post-term. The 
mothers will be randomly assigned to control and intervention groups. The 
intervention will consist of an initial in-person contact in the hospital 
followed by 2 home visits and 6 telephone contacts. Each contact will be 
guided by a sea-structured protocol and will be documented by the intervener 
using field notes. House's (1981) four types of support will be provided at 
each contact. Each subject's intervention contacts will be with a single 
intervention nurse. Services used will be measured using the Infant and Family 
Services Survey and an immunization record. Maternal psychological well-being 
will be measured using the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression 
Scale, Stress Support Scale, and three measures of the mother's perception of 
the stress associated with parenting her infant. The quality of the infant's 
social environment will be measured using a 1-hour naturalistic observation of 
mother-infant interaction and the HOME Inventory.

This presentation will focus on describing the strategies we have used to 
analyse the feasibility of the intervention (research question 1) and the 
results of these feasibility analyses. In addition, preliminary analyses of 
the effectiveness using the first half of the sample will be presented.


\\\\\
Critical Social Theory: Amplifying the Voices of HIV-Infected Minority Women

Debra E. Lyon

PURPOSE: Although nursing research focused on HIV infection in minority 
populations is one of the stated priorities of the NNCR (1994), research in 
this population raises many issues that defy simple adaptation of existing 
research strategies. The multifaceted needs and resources of these individuals 
warrant an approach that includes both personal, familial and societal 
considerations of lethal stigmatic illness. Critical social theory provides a 
framework for overcoming the detachment of analytic research and the 
"bracketing" of interpretive methods to provide for emancipation of 
participants, both researcher and those who are engaged as participants in a 
study.

SAMPLE/METHODS: A pilot study will be initiated in 1995 at the Virginia 
Commonwealth University HIV/AIDS Center to elicit the voices of women who are 
living with HIV. These individual voices will be examined both within the 
societal and the medical/nursing paradigms in order to illuminate the 
strengths, limitations and perceived vulnerabilities of minority women with 
HIV. The strategy outlined by Held (1980) will be used to provide a broad 
framework for the research methodology in this study; appropriate adaptation 
will be made by participants and researcher.

IMPLICATIONS: This study will contribute a view of minority women living with 
HIV within the societal context of stigmatic disease, poverty, racism, and 
sexism. Findings will have implications for future nursing research in 
marginalized populations.


\\\\\
Help-Seeking Patterns in Depressed Rural Women: A Grounded Theory Lens

Vicky M. Fisher

This paper will describe the qualitative method of grounded theory (Glaser & 
Strauss, 1966) in its application to studying patterns of help-seeking in 
rural women with depression. Inherent in the grounded theory method is the 
process of constant comparative analysis (Chenitz & Swanson, 1986). This 
process allows the investigator to alternately engage in data collection and 
data analysis, thus allowing for emergent theoretical development throughout 
the research experience. Constant comparative analysis is especially relevant 
in the attempt to enrich our understanding of health care delivery for 
"marginalized populations" (Hall, Stevens, & Meleis, 1994) as it actively 
includes these consumer voices in the process of expanded knowing. The 
grounded theory strategy will be described and critiqued using Morgan's 
analytic framework of research evaluation (Morgan, 1983). In Morgan's model, 
the evaluative research process is applied with particular emphasis given to 
modes of engagement between research investigator and participant. 
Additionally, the conceptual linkages between the constitutive assumptions, 
epistemological stance, and favored methodology of the grounded theory 
strategy will be explored. Vignettes from the author's research will be used 
to illustrate application of the Morgan model, while investigating an 
historically marginalized population of rural women with depression. Sequelae 
and consequences of the research process will be described, as the writer 
poses potential clinical and ethical dilemmas that are uniquely experienced by 
marginalized persons.


\\\\\
Case Study Research Methodology in Studing Marginalized Individuals and 
Communities: An Application of the Beyond Method Theory of Gareth Morgan

Norma Geddes

The case study research methodology lends itself to the study of marginalized 
individuals and communities as described by Hall, Stevens, Meleis (1994). In 
particular, the opportunity to let individuals participating in the research 
process both guide and edit the revelations of their lives, allows for rich 
detail and serendipitous discovery. Specific examples will be presented which 
illustrate the advantages of the case study method from the perspective of 
opportunities for discovery and opportunities for moving beyond method 
(Morgan, 1983). The ethical obligations of researching vulnerable, 
marginalized populations will also be explored. It is the thesis of this 
presentation that the researcher has a professional and implicitely moral 
commitment to participants engaged in study. The manifestations of this 
commitment are negotiated between the researcher and the participant.


\\\\\
A Comparison of Cultural Competence and Cultural Confidence of Senior Nursing 
Students at a Private Southern University

Rick Zoucha and Rojann R. Alpers

The American Society is becoming increasingly diverse and multi-cultural. 
Nurses must recognize the impact this has on our profession, our educational 
preparation and our ability to provide quality care. Nursing education has 
recognized the need to incorporate in its programs courses which survey 
different cultures, teach cultural assessment, which assist students to 
explore and understand their feelings and value for cultural diversity.

The specific aim and purpose for this study was to compare the self reported 
cultural competence and cultural confidence of senior nursing students who had 
received class content on culture sensitive nursing with a senior class who 
had not received any cultural content. The stated hypothesis for this study 
is: Are there differences in self reported cultural competence and cultural 
confidence of senior nursing students who have received class content on 
culture sensitive nursing and those senior nursing students who have not 
received in class culture sensitive nursing?

The subjects in this study consisted of (N=32) senior nursing students who 
received class content on culture sensitive nursing and (N=31) senior nursing 
students who have not received class content on culture sensitive nursing. The 
Bernal and Froman Cultural Self-Efficacy Scale was used to measure cultural 
competence and confidence in this sample. The tool was administered to senior 
nursing students during one semester who have received cultural sensitive 
content and in another semester to senior nursing students who have not 
received cultural sensitive content in class. Data analysis included measures 
of central tendency and dispersion, and t-test of significance were utilized.

Findings suggest overall, students who have received some course content on 
culturally-sensitive nursing feel less competent and less confident to provide 
culturally sensitive care than those who received no course content on the 
subject. The integration of multi-culturalism into the nursing curriculum and 
the findings of this study will be presented and discussed.

Implications for this study include: enhanced cultural curriculum, continued 
faculty and student assessment of cultural competence and cultural confidence, 
and establishment of a culturally friendly practice and learning environment.


\\\\\
Factors Affecting University-Based AIDS Education Efforts and Outcomes

Therese A. Boyd

Florida's state universities, in response to legislative mandates and concerns 
for college students, have launched a variety of AIDS education initiatives. 
However, the intended outcomes or changes in students' knowledge, attitudes, 
and sexual behavior is difficult to determine. This problem was addressed by 
investigating the efforts and outcomes of AIDS educational initiatives at a 
South Florida state university, while uncovering the factors that contribute 
to these outcomes.

A conceptual framework provided a visual model of factors that mediate the 
processes and/or outcomes experienced by the student in response to an AIDS 
educational effort. These factors are generally categorized as institutional 
mediators and individual mediators sharing subcategories of: people; 
circumstances; beliefs; and actions. Individual mediators also included 
endemic traits of the student. A qualitative methodology was adopted for 
flexibility and discovery of variables affecting efforts and outcomes. The 
study's five phase data collection process encompassed: 1) interviews with 
administrative and student leadership; 2) surveys of 804 undergraduate 
students; 3) in-depth interview with 22 students; 4) review of student 
interview transcripts by a panel of experts; and 5) extensive analyses of all 
data.

Findings indicated that students predominately receive AIDS information from 
impersonal mass media sources. In contrast to national studies, students at 
this University lacked proficiency (score of 80% correct or higher) in overall 
AIDS knowledge, particularly HIV prevention. Statistically significant 
relationships existed between level of knowledge, particularly HIV prevention. 
Statistically significant relationships existed between level of knowledge; 
condom use; and positive attitudes towards people with AIDS. Students wanted 
more information on HIV prevention, distributed by a variety of methods.

While this study found that students were becoming more knowledgeable, 
changing attitudes, and testing-out safer sexual behavior; it revealed a need 
for additional HIV prevention education, administrative support for 
programming, creative marketing strategies, varied methods for HIV prevention 
education, and promotion and support for sexual behavior change. The findings 
of this study are of particular importance to nursing students not only from a 
personal but a professional standpoint since nursing students are often 
queried by clients and peers about HIV/AIDS transmission and prevention. 
Specific recommendations include: garnering the support of academic 
leadership; utilizing effective marketing strategies; expanding the peer 
education program; and integrating HIV prevention messages throughout the core 
curriculum.


\\\\\
Measuring Emotional Responses to Psychological Stress: Differentiation Between 
Instrument Unreliability and Changes in Emotional States

Laura A. Porter

Theoretical perspectives on psychological stress and coping emphasize that 
patients' negative emotional states are likely to fluctuate in response to 
cognitive appraisal and the effectiveness of coping strategies. Low 
correlations across time between the same measures of emotional state suggest 
that the coping process influenced emotion. However, if the instrument to 
assess emotional response is not reliable, low correlations may also occur and 
confound results. In contrast, high correlations across time between the same 
measures of emotional state suggest that emotional reponse is more stable and 
may reflect the influence of personality. Based on the zero-order Pearson 
Product Moment Correlations, Heise (1969) proposed a method for calculating 
both instrument reliability and construct stability which has important 
applications for coping research.

A secondary data analysis was conducted to illustrate how instrument 
reliability and stability of emotional responses could be differentiated in a 
sample of patients coping with percutaneous tranluminal coronary angioplasty 
(PTCA). Emotional response (measured with the "Unsure" subscale of the Profile 
of Mood States) was assessed 24 hours prior to the treatment (Time 1), at 
discharge from the hospital (Time 2) and 2 weeks following discharge (Time 3). 
The Heise procedure was conducted on the data of 47 patients who completed the 
measure at all three time points. The sample included 39 men and 8 women with 
a mean age of 62 years (SD 11). Results indicated that instrument reliability 
and construct stability could be differentiated. Instrument reliability was 
moderate at .625. Interestingly, construct stability coefficients across the 
three time points were as follows S12=.845, S23=.907, and S13=.766. These 
coefficients were relatively high, particularly from Time 2 to Time 3, 
suggesting that this emotion was stable across time and that personality may 
have had a greater influence on emotional response than situational variables. 
Thus the Heise method was useful in examining the emotional outcome during 
this stressful event.


\\\\\
Predictors of Functional Status 3 Months After Heart Transplantation


Connie White-Williams, Anne Jalowiec, Kathleen L. Grady, Margaret Blood, 
Cheryl Hiros, Pam Binns-Tumer, and Susan Fazekas

Functional status is an important outcome measure after heart transplantation 
(HT). Predictors of functional status were examined in 190 patients who were 3 
months post HT at the University of Alabama Medical Center at Birmingham and 
Loyola University of Chicago Medical Center. Patients were 80% male, 87% 
white, 81% married, mean age = 53 years, 90% NYHA I and 14% working. Data were 
collected using the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP), Rating Form, Jalowiec 
Coping Scale, Heart Transplant Symptom Checklist, Compliance with Heart 
Transplant Regimen, Social Support Index, HT Intervention Scale and Chart 
Review Form. The areas of greatest functional disability were work (95.8%) and 
eating (87.4%). Stepwise multiple regression demonstrated 6/19 variables as 
predictors of better functional ability 3 months after HT which explained 
51.4% of the variance (F=34.35, p=.0000). The predictors were less symptom 
distress, fewer infections and complications in the last 2 months, better 
ability to cope with the HT, less difficulty handling the HT regimen and 
shorter length of hospital stay for the HT. Identification of these predictors 
and areas of greatest disability allow health care providers to target 
problematic areas and intervene to achieve optimal functional status after 
heart transplantation.


\\\\\
Racial and Gender Differences in Quality of Life Prior to and Following Kidney 
Transplantation

Donna K. Hathaway, Cheryl Johnson, Rebecca P. Winsett, and Jean Milstead

Patients who undergo kidney transplantation can now anticipate about a 90% 
success rate for the procedure. Because transplantation is now so successful, 
people are becoming more concerned about how this procedure affects quality of 
life (QoL). Although several studies indicate (QoL) improves for kidney 
recipients, oftentimes information about the patients' pretransplant QoL in 
lacking and studies rarely consider other factors which may influence QoL such 
as race and gender. The aim of this study was, therefore, to ascertain if race 
or gender influenced QoL prior to or following transplantation by addressing 
the following research questions.

1. What are the racial and gender differences in QoL for patients before 
kidney transplant?

2. What are the racial and gender differences in QoL for patients at 6 and 12 
months after kidney transplantation?

The study included 90 patients without diabetes who underwent kidney 
transplanttation. Demographic characteristics of the sample are displayed 
below.

group      number  age    mos of    percent    percent with   percent
                         dialysis   employed   HS education   married
Afr.-Amer.   36    39.5    18.8       36.1        66.7          47.2
Caucasians   54    39.2    27.4       70.4        77.8          63.0
Men          63    41.8    23.3       55.6        71.4          55.6
Women        27    33.5    25.5       59.3        77.7          59.3

Five questionnaires were administered to all transplant patients at the time 
of transplantation, and at 6 and 12 months posttransplant. The questionnaires 
included demographic and health history information, the Sickness Impact 
Profile (SIP=functional ability), the QoL Index (QLI=health and well-being), 
the Adult Self-Image Scales (ASIS=psychoemotional), and the General QoL Scale 
(GenQoL=global).

Essentially all QoL scores showed some improvement for both racial and gender 
groups at 6 and 12 months after transplantation. The African-Americans did, 
however, report better scores than Caucasian recipients on most ASIS scales 
both before and after transplantation. However, because the Caucasian 
recipients had much lower pretransplant scores they were able to show greater 
improvment in the ASIS scales posttransplant. Similarly, 3 of 5 QLI scores 
were better for African-Americans before transplantation and again less 
improvement was seen for them posttransplant while the Caucasian recipients 
reported more improvement following transplantation. In contrast, SIP scores 
indicated African-American recipients had more compromised ability to function 
in every day tasks than did the Caucasian recipients both before and after 
transplantation. Gender differences in QoL outcomes were only manifested 
before transplantation for most of the scores that measured the ability to 
function in every day tasks. These differences disappeared, however, following 
transplantation.

The findings of this study demonstrate that kidney transplantation enhances 
the QoL of all transplant recipients regardless of race or gender. Racial 
influences are, however, present. While African-American recipients achieve 
less improvement in some of the affective dimensions of QoL, this is likely 
due to a "ceiling effect" evidenced by their high pretransplant scores and the 
resultant inability to improve scores beyond this high level following 
transplantation. In contrast, measures of QoL that reflect the ability to 
perform every day tasks of living are more compromised for African-Americans 
and also demonstrate less improvement following transplantation than they do 
for Caucasians.


\\\\\
Concerns of Family Members of Bone Marrow Transplant Patients

Donna C. Owen, and Sharon D. Phipps

Families of persons undergoing bone marrow transplantation (BMT) need to 
contend with not only the issues associated with cancer but also a treatment 
protocol focused on complex frequent patient monitoring and a highly 
regimented technological environment. While an ever increasing body of 
knowledge has accrued about family members needs and concerns in the intensive 
care setting little is known about family member concerns during 
hospitalization for BMT. The purpose of this study was to identify concerns of 
family members of persons undergoing BMT during the acute hospitalization 
phase of initial transplant. The research question asked: What are the 
concerns expressed by family members of persons undergoing initial bone marrow 
transplantation?

The exploratory descriptive study took place on a 24 bed BMT unit in a 500 bed 
teaching hospital. Family members were asked to participate in focus groups 
about their concerns and the BMT hospitalization experience. Each focus group 
had between 4 and 6 members. Concerns of family members were elicited through 
the use of a semi-structured interview guide to facilitate focus group 
discussion. Family members were engaged in discussion for approximately 1.5 
hours. Interview probes were initially developed from the literature of family 
needs in the intensive care unit and the needs of parents of children with 
cancer. Examples of probing questions included: a) What do you need to help 
you manage or cope while your family member is in the hospital? b) What have 
you been concerned about most since your family member decided to have a bone 
marrow transplant? and c) What do you think is the best way for nurses to help 
you while your family member is in the hospital?

Audiotapes of each focus group were transcribed and a content analysis of the 
transcript was performed. The content analysis focused on identifying 
recurrent concerns and comparing identified concerns by BMT family members 
with concerns identified in published studies of family member concerns of 
critically ill patients. Concerns identified in the BMT group included: a) 
meaning of patient symptoms in relation to how well patient was responding to 
the transplant, b) truth-telling, c) keeping a positive attitude and being 
strong, d) control of information, e) receiving acknowledgement for their own 
needs, f) getting basic physical care needs met, g) being able to provide for 
the minute by minute physical care and comfort needs of the patient, and h) 
financial needs. Additional descriptive data and frequency of concerns will be 
reported.

Concerns identified family members of persons undergoing BMT are distinctly 
different from reported concerns of family members of persons hospitalized in 
intensive care units. Instrument development specifically addressing the 
concern of family members of BMT patients is needed. Qualitative studies that 
focus on gender and minority issues will provide greater insight into the 
needs and concerns of family members of persons undergoing BMT. Findings 
suggest that attention to issues of information dissemination in both content 
and timing needs to be carefully monitored in the clinical setting.


\\\\\
Living With Chronic Illness: A Study of Gender Differences

Sharon W. Dowdy

The purpose of this qualitative study was to examine gender differences of 
persons with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in three specific areas: strategies to 
cope with pain, adjustment to a chronic illness, and social support. The study 
of gender differences in chronic illness is important because these are rarely 
examined and because chronic illness affects such a large percentage of the 
adult population.

Subjects for the present study are part of a large, federally-funded grant 
studying the behavioral aspects of rheumatoid artritis. Data collection for 
the large study (N=208) consists of mailed questionnaires, telephone 
interviews, and home visits. Data collection for this study is based on the 
second telephone interview for a subset of twenty subjects, ten men and ten 
women. All subjects were diagnosed by a rheumatologist with definite or 
classical RA within five years of the interview, and none have concurrent 
rheumatic disease or psychiatric disorder. Ages range from 39 to 76, with a 
mean age of 58.5. Fifteen are married, four are widowed, and one is single.

Fourteen open-ended questions in the telephone interview were analyzed using 
primarily the method of analytic induction. Interviews ranged from 30 minutes 
to 80 minutes, with a mean length of 50 minutes. Pain coping strategies and 
adjustment were similar for men and women, whereas some important differences 
were found in social support for men and women. Pain coping strategies were 
categorized as cognitive and physical, with men and women using similar 
percentages of each. Women, however, mentioned more strategies than men. Men 
slowed down or stopped the activity that was affecting the pain more often, 
while women wanted to actively do something to relieve the pain or just rest. 
Adjustment also showed similar patterns for men and women. Both learned to 
live with RA by searching for a person-environment fit. Either the environment 
was adjusted to the person (25% and 23% for women and men, respectively) or 
the person to the environment (75% and 77% for women and men, respectively). 
Men and women mentioned instrumental support equally as often, but women 
mentioned informational support three times as often as men. Emotioual support 
was importat for men and women, but they looked for their emotional support 
from different sources. Men depended on their spouse and family for emotional 
support, while women depended on friends and family. Both mentioned the 
negative aspects of social support.

In summary, men and women discuss similar patterns of coping with pain and 
adjusting to a chronic illness. Both men and women underscore the need for 
social support, but seek support in different amounts and from different 
sources. Studying patterns of adjustment, coping, and social support for men 
and women may help in developing differential interventions to help achieve 
positive health outcomes.


\\\\\
Mothers' Views of Their Children's Growth

Elizabeth Reifsnider

The purpose of this study was to investigate the explanatory models of child 
growth and health held by mothers of children with growth failure. This study 
represents the second phase in an expansion of the investigator's dissertation 
research on the treatment of growth failure by community health nursing 
interventions. The interventions provided during the dissertation study were 
assoiated with a reduction in growth failure and an improvement in mother-
child interactions. The mothers were interviewed during the original study on 
their perceptions of their children's growth, health and size. The creation of 
explanatory models of child growth and health may allow us to understand the 
development of growth failure in children, and provide enhanced health 
services to those children at-risk of growth failure.

Specifically, the study explored the mothers' views of a healthy child, the 
impact of a child's diet on growth and health, and activities they identify 
that encourage the growth and health of their children. The research question 
was "What are the explanatory models of health and growth held by mothers of 
growth-delayed children?" An ethnographic design using intensive interviewing 
was employed. The sample consists of 39 mothers of growth-delayed children who 
were in the researcher's original study. The data analyzed consisted of 
semi-structured interviews conducted during the original research. A 
qualitative approach was used to provide a framework for the secondary 
analysis. Using ethnographic methods, the researcher inductively analyzed the 
themes and domains identified by the sample to create an explanatory model 
(Kleinman, 1980) of child growth for this population.

The interview guide used during the original study constitutes the instrument. 
The guide was utilized to identify the parent's perception of his/her child's 
growth and overall health. All interviews were tape-recorded. Qualitative data 
obtained from the original interviews was transcribed and analyzed using a 
code book developed by the researcher based on semantic domain, theme and 
pattern analysis (Spradley, 1979). Relevant demographic data and quantitative 
measures from the dissertation research was used to situate the study in a 
larger context.

The mothers of the growth-delayed children primarily identified genetics as 
the reason for their children's small size. This attribution persisted at the 
end of the study even though the mothers had seen their children grow at an 
accelerated rate during the intervention phase (four months). Mothers did not 
link their children's dietary intake with their size. The mothers wanted 
better environments for their children and identified poor neighborhoods and 
lack of safe play areas as impacting on their children's health. This research 
addresses the outcomes of child growth and health and focuses on the delivery 
of primary nursing care in the community and provides ideas for improving 
children's health and growth.


\\\\\
Effect of Neurological Status on Interactions Between Mothers and Their 
Medically Fragile Infants

Esther M. Tesh and Diane Holditch-Davis

Due to improved medical and nursing care, more infants with significant and 
chronic medical problems are surviving. The effect of an infant who needs 
prolonged hospitalization and continuing care even after hospital discharge on 
parent-infant interactions is unknown. In addition, an infant's neurological 
problems further impairs interactive abilities. The purpose of this study was 
to explore the effect of neurological impairment on the interactions between 
mothers and their medically fragile infants.

Forty-one medically fragile infants and their mothers were observed 
interacting together for about 1 hour in the hospital on entry into the study 
at an average of 5.5 weeks after term (SD 8.1), every 1-2 months while in the 
hospital, 1 month after hospital discharge, and at 6 months corrected age. An 
average of 3.1 observations were conducted on each subject (range2-6). All 
infants had chronic life-threatening illnesses; most were technologically 
dependent. Medical diagnoses included multiple anomalies, CNS anomalies, 
intracranial bleeds, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, renal impairment, tracheal 
abnormalities, and prenatal substance exposure. Twenty-four infants were born 
prematurely; 25 infants were first born. At 6 months 19 subjects had abnormal 
or questionable neurological examinations and were considered neurologically 
impaired. The mothers had a mean age of 26.7 (range 17 to 41); 25 of them were 
married.

The observations were scheduled at a time when a feeding was expected. Four 
maternal caregiving activities, 9 mother behaviors, 3 infant sleep-wake 
states, and 5 hierarchical linear model, was calculated for each mother and 
infant variable using infant status, and location home or hospital as 
independent variables.

Fifteen variables changed significantly with age. Mothers fed older infants 
less, achieved more vis-a-vis, and had less body contact time with them. They 
also touched, held, rocked, looked at, and gestured to them less. Older 
infants were alert more of the time and had fewer large movements, startles, 
jitters, and coughs or sneezes. Only two variables showed a direct effect of 
neurological status: neurologically impaired infants together but not 
caregiving or playing with their infants over age; whereas mothers of 
neurologically impaired infants spent more time together at an early age in 
comparison with neurologically normal infants, but less time together at a 
later age. Impaired infants had much more jittering, but only at early ages, 
and showed negative facial expressions more of the time, but only at older 
ages. Observation location affected 5 variables. Mothers achieved more vis-a-
vis and moved their infants more, and the infants were asleep less, moved 
less, and vocalized more during observations in the home.

Thus, the neurological status of the infants has relatively small impact on 
the interactions of medically fragile infants and their mothers during the 
first year. The age of the infant affected many more maternal and infant 
behaviors than did neurological status. It may be the the behaviors of 
medically fragile infants differ so greatly from the behaviors typical of 
normal healthy infants or that the mothers are so concerned about the survival 
of the infant that neurological impairment has only minor additional effects 
on interactions. However, neurological impairment probably has a great effect 
in the second year of life as impaired infants fail to achieve the normal 
developmental milestones of walking and talking, and survival becomes more 
assured.


\\\\\
Mothers in Prison: Maintaining Parental Role

Patricia J. Thompson and Nancy J. Harm

Specific Aims: The aims of this study were to better understand 1) the impact 
of incarceration on mothers and their children and 2) strategies that enhance 
parental role enactment during a mother's incarceration. As the 1990's began, 
the number of women in prison in the United States tripled to over 40,500. Two 
thirds of these are mothers of children under eighteen and 80% lived with them 
before prison. The prison environment has a negative impact on parenting. 
Mothers and children are separated, children must be cared for, and their 
mother's absence explained. Caretakers may not be able to care for the 
children appropriately, visits may be infrequent, and families must cope with 
related issues, such as substance abuse. A Parenting from Prison (PFP) program 
could help maintain the link between these mothers and their children. This 
research, based on a synthesis of symbolic interactionist role concepts, 
parental role components, and learning theory, measured the outcomes of teh 
PFP program for mothers in the Women's Unit at Tucker, Arkansas, and their 
children.

Research questions: 1. Is there a difference in parenting attitudes between 
incarcerated mothers who participate in the PFP program and those who do not, 
as indicated by post-intervention scores adjusted for pre-intervention status 
on the Adult Adolescent Parenting Inventory (AAPI) (Bavolek, 1989) and Index 
of Self Esteem (ISE) (Hudson, 1982)? 2. What is the status and experience of 
teh children of incarcerated women, as reported by the children and their 
caregivers?

Subjects: Question #1: PFP participants were 60 incarcerated adult mothers, 
selected into either an intervention group or a delayed intervention group. 
Question #2: Forty-eight children (ages 4 to 19 yrs) of 25 incarcerated 
mothers and their caregivers comprised the interview sample.

Methods: Question #1: Using a two-group repeated measures design, measures 
were administered to 60 women before and after the program of 15-weekly 
sessions of teh Nurturing Program for Parents (Bavolek & Comstock, 1985) and 
to a delayed intervention comparison group at those same times. Measures 
included semi-structured questionnaires, the AAPI, and the ISE. Data 
collection is complete. Group differences and interaction on the AAPI and ISE 
are currently being analyzed by a 2-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), using 
pretest scores as the covariate and intervention/no intervention and any type 
of abuse (drug, alcohol, emotional, physical, sexual) reported by mothers as 
factors. Question #2: Qualitative data collected through personal interviews 
with the caregivers and the children is undergoing content analysis using 
constant comparative techniques and calculation of frequencies.

Findings: Preliminary results indicate significant increases in pre-to-post 
scores on the AAPI and ISE and improved mother-child communication as a result 
of particiaption in the PFP program, as was found in previous studies. Most 
children's caregivers were their grandparents; the remainder were their 
fathers or other relatives. Caregivers and children described the children's 
school experiences, living situation, knowledge of mother's situation, 
response to separation from mother and siblings and to visiting the prison, 
and to perceived differences in mother-child relationships.

Implications: Parent education in the prison can help to maintain parent-child 
relationships. Children of incarcerated mothers and their caregivers have 
special needs for services to maintain physical and emotional health. Data 
from this study will be useful to nurses who provide teaching, counseling, 
emotional support, and referrals to mothers in or recently released from 
prison and/or to their family members.


\\\\\
Benefits of a Coordinated System of Community-Based Health Care Services for 
Medically Underserved Children

Jill M. Hayes

Access to health promotional services for children in the United States (U.S.) 
has become an issue of critical importance. Fifty percent of the U.S. youth of 
today are at risk for drug and alcohol abuse, STD's, pregnancy, and injury or 
death from violence or accident. These health related risks often lead to an 
increase in school absenteeism and poor academic performance.

The purpose of this study was the measurement of the benefits of improved 
access to health care for Medicaid-eligible children. The academic and medical 
records of 143 children enrolled in an innovative program providing 
comprehensive health care services to Medicaid-eligible children were 
reviewed. Demographic data were analyzed to identify any significant 
characteristics of study participants. Data on utilization of health services, 
absenteeism, overall health status, and academic performance were analyzed to 
determine if this population would benefit from improved access to health-care 
services.

There was a significant increase in the use of wellness and illness services 
by participants. There was also a significant increase in the absenteeism rate 
of participants between Time 1 and 2, and Time 1 and 3. It was anticipated 
that absenteeism would decline as utilization increased. However, as 
participant utilization of services increased, absenteeism also increased.

It was anticipated that academic performance would improve as utilization of 
health care services increased. However, academic performance declined as 
utilization increased. Finally there was a significant change in the health 
status scores of participants between Time 2 and 3. In addition, any possible 
correlation between utilization of services and absenteeism, and utilization 
of services and academic performance, were explored.

Findings of this study represent significant changes in this population 
relative to the variables studied. Both utilization of services and health 
status improved following one year of enrollment in the Alliance. Absenteeism 
and academic performance declined for the same time period. Possible rationale 
for these findings and potential implications are discussed.


\\\\\
Instrument Development: To Do or Not To Do

Sara H. Gueldner

The purpose of this paper is first to broadly discuss aspects of instrument 
development and second, to apply the different steps to an instrument on which 
I am currently working, the Index of Field Energy. The Index is a 17-item of 
well-being developed within the Rogerian Science of Unitary Human Being.

Four essential issues involved in instrument development will be presented. 
The first issue is determining the need for developing a new instrument as 
opposed to using or refining one that is already available. The second issue 
surrounds constructing a new scale and defining and analyzing the inherent 
concepts and subconcepts. Discussion on the use of experts and focus groups as 
ways to accomplish this will be included. The third issue concerns the 
psychometric properties important to the developing instrument. The number of 
items, item format, scale readability and clarity, scoring, length, and 
selecting appropriate tests for validity and reliability will be discussed. 
The fourth and last issue concerns piloting and revising the instrument.

The Index of Field Energy is a 17-item scale of well-being developed within 
the Rogerian Science of Unitary Human Beings. Initially, 75 potential items 
were generated. These were subsequently reviewed by a panel of nine Rogerian 
scholars to assure content validity; 40 items remained following this review. 
These eventually evolved into 17 items, each of which consists of a bipolar 
pair of pictures (i.e., a turtle at one end and a butterfly at the other) in a 
7 point Likert scale format.

The psychometric properties of the instrument were established through two 
sequential samples of 300 college students followed by 325 individuals of 
varying ages. The latter included 60 persons over the age of 65. The scale was 
designed both for people with limited formal education and for whom English is 
not the primary language. A game board format has recently been developed that 
allows hand placement instead of a paper and pencil response. This format is 
especially appropriate for children and older people. Test anxiety is reduced 
and people with limited mobility can respond.


\\\\\
Accessing Instruments: Where Are They When You Need Them
MrtiN Rice and Carolyn C. Kee

The purpose of this presentation is to discuss methods of locating, accessing, 
and selecting instruments for use in a given study. Both formal and informal 
methods of locating instruments will be considered as well as how to access 
instruments including those with and without a copyright. Finally, selection 
criteria for judging the merit of an instrument in relation to a particular 
study will be discussed.

Locating Instruments: Formal methods for locating instruments to be discussed 
will include using computerized databases such as the Health and Psychological 
Instruments Online (HAPI). Information on compendia, books, and other 
resources will also be provided. More informal methods to be discussed will 
include networking, using proceeding manuals or conference brochures as 
information sources, and ways to locate researchers in a particular area.

Accessing Instruments: Methods of accessing information on copyrighted 
instruments include obtaining and using proof sets of scales as well as 
determining any restrictions on purchasing and using. Methods of accessing 
non-copyrighted instruments will also be considered.

Selecting Instruments: Once the instrument has been located, the suitability 
of the instrument for the study must be assessed. Important aspects include 
identifying the theory that undergirds the instrument, determining the fit 
with the investigator's conceptual definition, judging the appropriateness of 
the validation procedures used on the instrument in relation to the present 
study, and, similarly, the methods used for ascertaining reliability. 
Assessing the more mundane aspects of an instrument will also be discussed and 
include such concerns as length and appropriateness of format to study 
respondents.

Application: Brief discussions of the match between the concept of temperament 
in children and instruments designed to measure this concept will be presented 
as will the processes used in instrument selection for a study on medication 
use in older, dialysis patients.


\\\\\
Refining Instruments Through Factor Analysis: But These Items Can't Go 
Together!

Lillian R. Eriksen

Purpose: This paper focuses on the use of factor analysis for the refinement 
of instruments. The process is illustrated by an example of the use of 
exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) 
procedures. The use of EFA ad CFA approaches will be reviewed. The purpose of 
EFA to determine the linkage between observed variables and their latent or 
underlying factors will be illustrated. The use of CFA to test the hypothesis 
that specific links do in fact exist will be demonstrated.

Research Questions: 1. Is the initial conceptual framework for the development 
of an instrument to measure patient satisfaction with nursing care supported 
by the data from the first sample? 2. Is the factor structure, resulting from 
the first sample confirmed in a second sample?

Instrument: A 33 item, self-report, Likert type scale, to measure patient 
satisfaction with nursing care in the hospital was developed on framework 
consisting of 5 factors (Empathy, Dependability, Responsiveness, Information 
Giving, Tangibles).

Subiects: The first sample consisted of 230 patients from a women's hospital 
in Australia. The second sample consisted of 103 patients from two community 
hospitals in the Southwestern U.S.

Data Collection and Analyses: Questionnaires were distributed to patients the 
day of or the evening before discharge. They had been patients for at least 2 
days. Questionnaires were supplied with sealable envelopes for 
confidentiality. The EFA, using SPSS for Windows, was performed to examine the 
supposed factor structure. The process of using the SPSS output to refine the 
instrument structure will be presented. The CFA, on the second sample, was 
performed using structural equation modeling. EQS for Windows was used for the 
modeling. The process of using the EQS output will be presented.

Finding: The factor structure was not supported by the data from the first 
sample. The EFA provided information for refining the instrument. The 
structural equation modeling used for the CFA produced a respectable model fit 
which was refined with a respecification.

Implications: Both EFA and CFA provide powerful tools to support the 
refinement of instruments. EFA is a useful approach for identifying concepts 
underlying a larger number of variables. CFA, using structural equation 
modeling, can provide a test of the proposed specific relationship between a 
concept and the indicants of the concept. It is essential to keep in mind that 
all of this refinement is most dependent on the theoretical issues underlying 
any instrument. Factor analyses techniques are no substitute for thoughtful 
substantive consideration.


\\\\\
Determing Scale Properties of Pictorial Scales: How Do You Get From Disney to 
Decimals?

Dorothy J. Stuppy

Background and significance: Determining a person's perception of the 
magnitude of subjective sensory stimuli such as dyspnea, fatigue, or pain 
represents a special challenge to clinical nurses and researchers. Ideal 
scales would be easy for people to use, be reliable and valid for measuring 
the concept of interest, and have properties of interval/ratio measurement. 
Few scales can meet all of these criteria. There is much debate about the 
level of measurement of Likert type scales and respondents must be able to 
understand and relate to the anchors used in the response scale. Visual analog 
scales possess mernc/ratio properties but may not be easily understood by 
young children, elders, or those from various cultural backgrounds. As a 
result, there is a need to develop and test alternative scaling models.

Use of a graphic scaling model using picture scales has been suggested for 
measuring the concept of pain. Most pictorial scales consist of a series of 
cartoon faces such as those developed in 1988 by Baker and Wong (6 faces), in 
1990 by Bieri, Reeve, Champion, Addicoat, and Ziegler (7 faces) and in 1985 by 
McGrath, deVeber, and Heam (9 faces) among others. The scales may also be a 
series of actual photographs of individuals expressing varying levels of pain 
(Beyer & Aradine, 1987). While these scales have been developed and tested 
mainly with children, there is a growing body of evidence that they may also 
be reliable and valid for self assessment of pain in adults. However, there is 
a question among researchers about the level of measurement represented by the 
pictorial scales. On the surface, these scales seem to represent a 
categorical-rank order level of measurement. However, researchers wishing to 
analyze data using parametric statistics are attempting to establish interval 
or ratio properties for the scales.

Purpose of presentation: This presentation will discuss strategies which are 
being used to determine if intervals between the faces on each of the various 
scales are equal or if the position of each face on a metric scale can be 
determined. Research examples of magnitude estimation, cross modal matching 
and variations on number/line estimation will be presented.

Data from a current study (data collection in progress) of adults from various 
cultures (African-American, Anglo, and Hispanic) will be presented. The 
purpose of the study is to establish scale properties, reliability, and 
validity of the Bieri and Aradine (1987) Faces Pain Scale (FPS) as it is used 
by lower income adults.


\\\\\
Critical Thinking and Nursing Management: A New Approach

Eunice A. Bell

The rapid rate and constancy of change in today's health care environment 
requires nursing leaders with exceptional problem solving and decision making 
skills. Critical thinking skills of analysis, inference and evaluation are 
crucial. In particular, first line management requires constant use of 
critical thinking in areas of human and fiscal resource management. This study 
investigates the use of a new educational model to improve critical thinking 
skills of nurse managers. The project uses the research of Richard Paul and 
associates at the Center for Critical Thinking.

The research questions posited an increase in critical thinking skills and 
disposition upon completion of the six months educational project. The 
participants were 15 nurse managers in a 350 bed acute care hospital in the 
southeast. They included both sexes, ages from 30-52 years and educational 
levels from Diploma to MSN. The management experience ranged from 1-20 years. 
The measurement tools used both pre and post project were The California 
Critical Thinking Skills Test and Disposition Inventory. In addition, 
participant self assessment was used.

Findings included increases in total skills scores from 1-8 points. Increase 
in sub scores of analysis and inference were found while evaluation sub scores 
continued high. Increases in disposition toward critical thinking were found 
across the sample but were higher in those with higher skill scores. Of 
interest, participants with low pre project scores had larger increase in 
skills scores. Those with high beginning scores improved slightly or remained 
the same. Participant self assessment reflected strong agreement of learning 
about critical thinking and of use in the work and home setting.

This preliminary study of a new approach to critical thinking and nurse 
managers will be replicated by the researcher with additional like groups. The 
tools used for the first time with nurse managers should be tested further. 
Understanding the impact of good analysis and inference skills upon decision 
making leads to the suggestions that critical thinking be:

1. A major element of MSN education.

2. A major component of new nurse manager orientation.

3. Included in ongoing nurse manager education.


\\\\\
Program Evaluation: The Employees' Perspective

Rebecca Krepper and Duke Rohe

Given today's economic pressures, health-care organizations are seeking ways 
to realize major gains in quality, productivity, efficiency and improve their 
competitive edge. St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital (SLEH), a 900 bed tertiary 
care facility, is in the process of implementing a patient care delivery model 
called "Team Care" as their answer to sustained, high quality, high value, 
patient-focused care. Evaluation research is one methodology available to 
assist in making decisions about the effectiveness and efficiency of existing 
programs. This quasi-experimental study was designed to collect data on the 
employees perceptions of their work environment prior to and during the 
transition to Team Care.

All health care workers who were assigned to one of the cardiovascular (CV) 
demonstration units were surveyed using the Work Environment Scale (WES) in 
1993, prior to implementation of Team Care. In 1994 all patient care staff 
from throughout the hospital were asked to complete the WES. This therefore 
allowed for pre- and post-test comparison of the CV units and comparison of 
the CV units with those areas just beginning implementation of Team Care. The 
sample consisted of staff who completed and returned the questionnaire; 
1993=75 (52% return) & 1994=548 (56% return).

The WES, developed by Moos in 1981, is comprised of ten subscales that assess 
three underlying dimensions: Relationship, Personal Growth, and System 
Maintenance and System Change. Descriptive statistics were calculated for each 
of the deoographic variables and means were determined for each of the ten 
subscales on the WES. Where appropriate oneway anovas, correlations and 
t-tests were completed in order to identify significant (a=.05) relationships 
or differences.

In comparing the CV units before and after implementation of Team Care it was 
found that the workers surveyed in 1994 differed significantly frcm 1993 in 
Supervisors Support (u'94=5.3 vs u'93=6.02); Control (u'94=5.59, down from 
6.36 in '93); and Work Pressure (u'94=5.75 up from a low of 4.91 in `93). 
These results were understandable because the restructuring involved a 
decrease in the absolute number of middle managers. With the accompanying 
shared leadership philosophy, workers are encouraged to be more independent. 
Work Pressure was above the tool mean for all areas in 1994 perhaps due to 
factors not connected with Team Care.

In 1994 the CV area was significantly different from one or more of the other 
4 services in regard to their perception of Involvement (u=6.15), Supervisor 
Support (u=5.3), Peer Cohesion (u=5.38) and Autonomy (u=6.35). The first 3 
variables are all subscales of the relationship dimension. These scales assess 
the extent to which employees are concerned about and committed to their jobs 
and the extent to which employees are friendly to and supportive of one 
another. The last subscale, Autonomy, represents the extent to which employees 
are encouraged to be self-sufficient and to make their own decisions. All of 
these characteristics are reported in the literature to be outcomes of a 
patient focused approach to care delivery.

The value of benchmarking prior to initiating change cannot be overstated. The 
WES provided a snapshot of where the staff was in regard to the 10 subscales. 
This will be invaluable when assessing the impact of Team Care in the years to 
come.


\\\\\
A Study of the Relationship of Job Satisfaction with the Organizational 
Variables of Structure, Technology, and Environment in Public Health Nursing

The purpose of this study was to use an exploratory design to examine the 
relationship of the organizational variables of structure, technology, and 
environment with job satisfaction in public health nurses in South Carolina. 
Methodology involved the distribution of a five-part Questionnaire Packet to 
all licensed nursing personnel in the South Carolina Department of Health and 
Environmental Control (SC DHEC). Each packet contained a letter of 
introduction and five tools for data collection - Structure Instrument 
(Alexader, 1986), Technology Instrument (Leatt & Schneck, 1981), Environment 
Instrument (Leifer, 1975), McCloskey-Mueller Job Satisfaction Scale (MMSS) 
(McCloskey-Mueller, 1990) and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) (Herman, 1990). Two 
months were allowed for collection of data.  Packets were received from 845 
personnel for a response rate of 50.6% with the final study sample consisting 
of 838 nursing personnel representing all 13 health districts and SC DHEC 
Central Office.

Data aalysis included descriptive analysis of the demographic characteristics 
of the study group, and differences in research variables by classification, 
education, work status, program assignment, years in nursing, and years at 
DHEC. Analysis of variace was done to determine the significance of 
differences between groups by demographic variables. Instrument results were 
analyzed with multiple regression techniques to identify relationships among 
the research variable. Stepwise regression was used to deterinine the 
subset(s) of research and demographic variables that best explained the 
variace in job satisfaction. Correlational approaches were used in exaiming 
the relationships among demographic and research variables. Comparative 
techniques of factor analysis and coefficient of congruence were used in 
examining the performance of these instruments in this population with 
previous research. Difference score analysis was used to explore the fit if 
the three dimensions of structure, three dimensions of technology, and 
environmental uncertainty. Seven relational statements were tested through 
regression analysis and t-test of quartile rankings.

Organizational structure was the critical variable in predictIng job 
satisfaction in public health nurses in SC DHEC. Structure accounted for 41% 
of the variance in job satisfaction on the MMSS and 26% on the VAS. Structure 
remained the critical predictor in the difference score analysis. Two of the 
seven relational statements were supported. Technology and environment assumed 
significance only in concert with each other or structure. This study has 
implications for nurse administrators in public health to create more flexible 
work environments with active involvement of staff for increased job 
satisfaction.


\\\\\
Maintaining Quality of Worklife for Practicing Nurses During Organizational 
Transitions

Sally Knox

Reorganization, restructuring and reengineering are common occurrences in 
health care institutions as health care reform calls for dramatic changes in 
the way health care is delivered in America's hospitals and other care 
delivery organizations. The focus of this study was to identify administrative 
and management behaviors of the Chief Nurse Executive, perceived as most 
supportive and helpful to practicing nurses during a time of organizational 
change and transition. The specific transition underway at the time of the 
study was the change from a functional practice model to a patient-centered 
model of modular nursing.

The research question considered in the study is: What 
administrative/management behaviors are most valued by practicing nurses 
during a transition in practice model? The areas of administrative/management 
assessed were:

1. High visibility of administrators/managers in practice areas during 
transitional period.
2. Education of staff in relation to the change.
3. Verbalized commttment to quality care during the transition by 
administrative/management staff.
4. Verbalized commitment to the welfare of staff during the transition by 
administrative/management staff
5. Support for the problem solving of staff by administrative/management 
individuals.
6. Communication of plans regarding the transition and future progress.
7. The authority of staff for their aspect of the change.
8. Follow-up with staff regarding their suggestions and questions during time 
of the change.
9. Opportunities to clarify issues in a non-threatening environment during 
transition.
10. Rewards and recognition of staff for success in performance during the 
transition.
11. Provision of tools and resources needed during the transition.

The study included sixty five staff nurses practicing in the patient care 
areas where the change from functional nursing to the patient-focused modular 
model occurred. The perceptions of the nurses regarding the transition 
behaviors were assessed and ranked in order of importance at the mid term 
point of the transition.

All of the participants were registered nurses. The nurses were provided a 
list of the administrative/management behaviors and were asked to rank order 
them in relation to their perceived value during the transition.

The findings of the study indicated that the most valued 
administrative/management behaviors during a time of transition are:

1. Communication of plans regarding the transition and future progress.
2. Verbalized commitment to quality care by administrative/management staff 
during the transition.
3. High visibility of administrators/managers during the transition period.

The quality of work life is difficult to maintain during transitions. Nursing 
staff in the clinical practice areas often have need for support and 
information from administration and management during times of transition. The 
behaviors perceived as supportive and helpful by staff may differ from those 
intended as supportive and helpful by administration/management during 
transitions. Transitions can be facilitated for staff by the delivery of 
valued behaviors by administration and management. If behaviors are not valued 
or perceived as supportive, the intention of providing assistance to 
registered nurses during the process of transition will not be actualized.


\\\\\
Understanding Chronic Dysfunction in the Aged Using a Disability Model: 
Urinary Incontinence as an Exemplar

Susan M. Sherman and Carol C. Hogue

Identifying theoretical frameworks that guide nursing research and inform 
education and practice is vital for nursing to participate in shaping health 
care delivery for the future. In addition, an appreciation of the complexity 
of the many dimensions of chronic disease and dysfunction suggests the need 
for an underlying framework that can adequately guide research and infuse our 
research findings with meaning. This presentation focuses on the exploration 
of a disability framework for use in studying urinary incontinence (UI).

The concept of disability is not new. The growth in interest in rehabilitation 
and development of functional testing which occurred during the 1940's and 
1950's are forethoughts of current models, though dramatically transformed. In 
the realm of conceptual development, however, disability and some of its 
related terminology and concepts have taken on diverse meanings. These 
meanings will be explored in the context of several disability models (World 
Health Organization, International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities 
and Handicaps [1980] and Nagi [1991]). A current, enhanced model fo disability 
(Verbrugge and Jette, 1994) will be presented and discussed. Strengths and 
weaknesses of the model for nursing research will be explored.

Qualities of UI make it ideal for testing the adequacy and usefulness of teh 
disability framework for nursing. UI is a chronic, nonfatal condition 
affecting approximately 35% of community dwelling elders (Diokno, Brock, Brown 
and Herzog, 1986). Most rate symptoms as mild. However, as time progresses, 
certain factors can decelerate or accelerate the processes which eventually 
define or accentuate the disabling aspects of UI for the individual. A 
presentation of UI as a disablement process will be reviewed as well as 
enhancements to the model which feature secondary conditions and dysfunctions 
that frequently accompany UI.


\\\\\
Self-Reported Health and Physical Performance Status of Older Adults with 
Arthritis: Implications for Measurement of Disability

Carol C. Hogue and Sharon M. Cullinan

Introduction: Over 30 million Americans report having arthritis, a generic 
term for many diseases characterized by inflammation and joint involvement. 
Prevalence increases with age; by 60, 49% of the population report arthritis. 
Prevalence continues to increase with age after 60. Disablement is the effect 
chronic conditions have on the functioning of specific body systems, and 
people's abilities to perform expected roles in society. While not fatal, 
osteoarthritis (OA), the most prevalent form of musculoskeletal disease, is 
the most common cause of disability in older adults. Persons with OA have 
reduced functional performance and aerobic power: they often limit their 
activity because of pain. Until recently, treatment patterns restricted 
activity. Levels of activity interact with disease effects, and both are 
superimposed upon the declines of normal aging. In nursing research on older 
adults at risk for disablement, investigators are faced with the choice of 
measures of physical function: self-reported evidence or observation of actual 
performance, or both. In this study, both methods were used, and this paper 
reports the relationship between the two methods in a sample of older adults 
with OA of the hip or knee.

Methods: Sixty-seven ambulatory but sedentary older adults (mean age 72) who 
reside in the community in a rural southeastern county were studied. Subjects 
were 58% white, 88% female, had 9.6 years of education, had no severe 
cognitive impairment, and had 2.8 chronic conditions. The Sickeness Impact 
Profile (SIP), physical dimension, was the self-reported measure of physical 
health. Performance measures included the 6-minute walk, integrated test of 
spine, hip, and knee flexion and extension, functional reach, and timed 
eighteen-foot walmk with and without a 10# bag of groceries. Covariates 
included age, number of chronic conditions, cognitive performance, arthritis 
pain, education, race, gender, and the psychosocial dimension of the SIP. 
Multiple regression analyses were conducted after investigating distributions 
and multicollinearity.

Results: Five performance measures explained 52% of the variance in self-
reported physical health: getting up from the floor, function reach, 18-foot 
walk, 6-minute walk, and ascending stairs. Neither age in years, race, gender, 
number of chronic condition, education, nor cognitive performance moderated 
that relationship, but when categorical age (younger or older than 75), 
arthritis pain, and the psychosocial dimension of the SIP were included as 
covariates, 72% of the variance was explained. Especially in adults over 75, 
the presence of pain, and social and emotional factors strenthen the 
relationship between self-reported physical health and observed physical 
performance.


\\\\\
Measurement Characteristics of Disability-Related Constructs in Chronically 
Institutionalized Nursing Home Residents

Eleanor S. McConnell and Carol C. Hogue

Nursing home residents suffer from high levels of dependency in self-care, yet 
little is known about factors that may be precursors to worsening dependency. 
Disablement models suggest the present of potentially manipulable variables 
intervening between disease and disability that may be fruitful points for 
intervention. Before these models can be fully utilized, adequacy of 
measurement of disability and related factors in the population of interest 
must be established. The purpose of this study was to assess the test 
characteristics of measures of disability and related constructs proposed in 
the based measures originally developed and tested in populations other than 
nursing home residents were examined. Research questions were: (1) What is the 
inter-rater, test-retest, and internal consistency reliability of standardized 
measures of cognitive performance, strength, range of motion, functional 
limitation, and disability? and (2) Does each measure perform in nursing home 
residents in a manner consistent with that reported in other populations? 
Inclusion criteria were: (1) Over age 60, (2) stands with assistance, (3) 
follows simple commands, (4) permanent resident of nursing home, (5) not 
terminally ill or medically unstable, (6) resident or proxy informed consent 
obtained. Sixteen permanent residents over age 60 from one nursing home 
participated in the reliability testing. Data from an additional 49 subjects 
representing two nursing home sites were used to assess the factor structure 
of each measure. Reliability was assessed using intra-class correlation 
coefficients (ICCs). Coefficient alpha was calculated as a measure of internal 
consistency. Exploratory factor analysis using a principal axis factoring 
technique was used to explore the dimensionality of each measure. Measures 
obtained included hand-held dynamometry, goniometry, the Neurobehavioral 
Cognitive Screening Examination (NCSE), the 7-item Physical Performance Test 
(PPT), and the Functional Independence Measure (FIM). Subjects' functional and 
cognitive status were similar to nursing home patients nationally, but were 
more likely to be male (67%), were slightly younger (mean age 76.7, SD=9.13). 
Findings: All measures had excellent test-retest and inter-rater relability, 
except two items on the NCSE. Test-retest concordance at one week varied by 
measure and ranged from ICC=.83 to .91 for range of motion and strength 
measures, ICC=.32 to .91 for the NCSE, ICC=.80 for teh PPT, and ICC=.71 to .89 
for teh FIM. Inter-rater reliabilities for all measures ranged from ICC=.80 to 
.99. Internal consistency of teh NCSE, PPT and FIM was high. Factor structures 
for each measure were consistent with other measurement work reported on these 
instruments, except for the NCSE, literature was observed. Implications: Many 
existing measures of disability and related constructs can be sued reliably in 
selected nursing home residents. Unresolved issues in using these measures in 
nursing hom residents include establishing their relationship to self-reported 
and proxy-reported function, and structuring measurement protocols to minimize 
respondent burden and missing data.


\\\\\
Ethical Dilemmas in Clinical Nursing Research

Teresa J. Dossey

Advancements in nursing practice are derived from the research of expert 
practitioners. Thus, advanced practice nurses have a professional 
responsibility to participate in research and many take an active role in 
clinical research studies.

This presentation will describe case studies that exemplify some of the 
complex ethical issues advanced practice nurses may encounter within the 
clinical research setting. These situations occurred during a 
pharmaco-therapeutic clincial research project involving a high-risk 
obstetrical population. Various ethical issues emerged during the course of 
the research, including conflicts with autonomy, justice, beneficence, and 
nonmaleficence. In addition, appropriate ethical considerations in these cases 
were confounded by the presence of a second individual--the fetus.

While obstetrics is a specialized field with unique patient care situations, 
the ethical issues that arise when advanced practice nurses are involved in 
clinical research are universal. Numerous problems arise in dealing with 
unpredictable human beings in the clincal setting that are not routinely 
discussed in research courses. The first conflict advanced practice nurses 
will often face is their role as a health care provider versus that of an 
objective research scientist. A systematic approach to the logical ordering of 
the facts, opinions, and values, is discussed within this complex scenario. 
Analysis is presented through the application of a case-based method of 
reasoned analysis.


\\\\\
Culture and Conflict: A Casuistic Ethical Analysis in Clinical Psychiatric 
Nursing

Jane H. Dimmitt

The impending impact of health care reform supports the prediction that 
advanced practice nurses will occupy an expanded role in the delivery of 
health care, especially with underserved and rural areas, particularly within 
the field of mental health services. The inherent independent nature of such 
practice environments combined with the pluralism which exists in today's 
multiculral society demand that professional nurses working in these 
circumstances develop and utilize an ethical framework for the analysis of 
patient care in situations that invoke moral conflict.

In the absence of a well articulated conceptual framework for nursing ethics, 
this paper argues for a theory of applied ethics--casuitics--used within a 
clinical reasoning model to analyze the complicated issues presented in a case 
invoking the sexual cultures of violence and polysubstance abuse in 
adolescents receiving treatment for sexually transmitted disease. This 
approach is based on a philosophy that ethics are values--those things that 
are cherished most by individuals in their own lives. Ethics, therefore, 
becomes what each individual encounters and believes. In an effort to 
appreciate such differences, a broader view is required that encompasses and 
acknowledges another's value system.

Casuistry, as a process, recognizes and appreciates the importance 
ofparticular characterittics withn individual cases. As society becomes more 
ethnically diverse and multicutural in character, the potential for existing 
and interpersonal tensions increases. Many challenges to the 
psychiatric/mental health advanced nurse practitioner within the community are 
presented and discussed--dilemmas which are bound to increase in frequency and 
complexity as violence continues within the home and within society.


\\\\\
Ethical Dilemmas in Dealing with Cognitively Impaired Elders

Susan J. Barnes

This presentation discusses methods of assessing cognitive impairment in 
elders who may be asked to participate in research. Issues of informed 
consent, guardianship, and autonomy are important for the researcher to 
understand when dealing with a population that is vulnerable. Within the 
geriatric clinical setting, nurses frequently encounter patients who, although 
legally competent, appear to have their mental capacities compromised or 
undermined by illness, anxiety, or pain. On the other hand, individuals who 
have been ruled incompetent to handle routine matters in their daily lives, 
such as handling of their finances, my still retain the ability to make some 
limited decisions. These may or may not include decisions to participate in 
clinical research. It is therefore important for nurses engaged in such 
activities to be able to assess the mental capacity of these adults as an 
essential part of the informed consent process. Not only is this an ethical 
issue, it is also a moral obligation.

The Folstein Mini Mental State Exam is discussed as a screening tool to 
determine patient's mental status and ability to sign consent. The exam can be 
used to differentiate individuals who can sign consent for themselves and 
those who need a guardian's permission to participate in research activities.


\\\\\
Implementing Advance Directives in the Clinical Setting: The Experience of 
Critical Care and Oncology Nurses

Kathryn E. Artnak

The Patient Self-Determination Act of 1990 is a federally mandated law that 
requires health care institutions to make all patients and clients aware of 
state laws regarding advance directives (e.g., living wills). Conceived to 
protect individual choice in medical treatment decision making, particularly 
at the end of life, implementation of this health care policy has become in 
many places another exercise in institutional bureaucracy.

This paper presents the findings from focus group discussion sessions designed 
to elicit the experience of nurses regarding the utility of advance care 
planning documents in the clinical setting. Two clinical sites were purposely 
chosen--the intensive care unit and the oncology unit--due to the probability 
of the presence and subsequent implementation of advance directives (e.g., 
living wills). Analysis of the data showed that conflict often occurred over 
the interpretation of these documents between the physicians, the nurses and 
the families of the patient involved. They describe the effect of an 
overzealous regard for individualism within the context of health care 
decision making, often creating complex, difficult situations of an ethical 
nature where patients and families are often left facing serious illness 
alone, frightened, and without guidance. Such results are troubling for the 
proclaimed purposes of advance directives which are to protect the "best 
interests" of individuals regarding their treatment choices for a time when 
they are unable to speak for themselves.


\\\\\
An Examination of Coping Strategies and Self-Care Practices of Elderly African 
American Women with a Chronic Health Problem

Sarah V. Myers

Statement of the Problem: A major methodological issue in research with 
minority populations is whether particular instruments are culturally 
sensitive. The use of instruments which are not culturally sensitive may 
result in inconclusive findings.

Specific Aims: The specific aims of this pilot study were: (1) To determine 
the reliability and validity of the Jalowiec Coping Scale and the Denyes 
Self-Care Practice Instrument in a population of elderly African American 
Women, and (2) To describe the coping strategies and self-care practices of 
elderly African American women with a chronic health problem.

Research Questions: The following research questions were formulated to guide 
this study: 1. Is the Jalowiec Coping Tool and the Denyes Self-Care Practice 
Instrument reliable and valid in a sample of elderly African American women? 
2. What are the coping strategies and self-care practices of elderly African 
American women with a chronic health problem?

Methods: The study design was a descriptive exploratory design. A sample of 65 
women were recruited for this study. Three instruments were used to collect 
data: the Jalowiec Coping Scale, the Denyes Self-care Practice Instrument and 
a researcher developed questionnaire.

Results: Data were analyzed using mean scores for use and effectiveness of 
coping strategies. The internal consistency of the Jalowiec Coping Scale and 
the Denyes Self-Care Practice Instrument was evaluated. Cronbach alphas of .72 
were obtained for the Jalowiec Coping Scale and .73 for the Denyes Self-care 
Practice Instrument when used with elderly African American women.

Conclusion: Findings from this study have facilitated an understanding of some 
of the methodological issues which must be addressed in conducting research 
with minority populations, coping strategies and self-care practices were also 
assessed. This data will be useful to other investigators who are interested 
in conducting research with minority populations.


\\\\\
The Context of Caregiving in Frail African-American Elderly Dyads

David L. Kahn and Yvonne Eaves

This presentation reports on part of the findings of a study of the 
experiences of caregiving in frail African-American elders living in dyadic 
relationships. The specific aims of this ethnographic study included a thick 
description of these experiences from the perspective of the elders, as well 
as a description of the influence of contextual elements, such as ethnicity 
and history of loss, on these experiences.

The methods of data collection in the study included ethnographic interviews 
with 14 pairs of African-American elders of which at least one of the elders 
required regular caregiving activity. These interviews were conducted over 
several sessions by the C.I., an African-American women. Data were also 
collected through participant observation by the P.I., a non-African-American 
man. Participant observation involved the formation of relationships over a 
two year period between the P.I. and two additional dyads. Participant 
observation data included multiple informal interviews and participation with 
these elders in important social and community events.

Data for analysis included transcripts of the ethnographic interviews and 
extensive field notes inscribed by the P.I. These data were analyzed using a 
traditional hermeneutic approach. This approach included careful and multiple 
readings of the data texts, identification of exemplars that captured 
important aspects of informants' experiences, sorting and coding of exemplars 
into categories, and arranging categories into themes that were representative 
of the data as a whole. The themes were used to produce a narrative 
description of the informants' experiences in relation to the specific aims of 
the study.

One interesting theme in the findings was the seamlessness or transparency of 
the experience of caregiving for those elders who were taking care of the 
other. In contrast to the vast literature about caregiver burden, primarily 
derived from research on middle class European-Americans, these elders did not 
talk about burdens of caregiving as part of their everyday life. Instead, 
caregiving was taken for granted, was something that they had been doing for 
others most of their lives, and was not a new, unusual, or particulariy 
important or salient experience.

This theme will be discussed in detail in this presentation and illustrated 
with examples of data. In addition, several themes from the data that 
contextualize this finding and explain its meaning from the perspective of the 
informants will be presented. These contextual themes include the notion of a 
separation between the responsibility for caregiving and the actual provision 
of such care, a history of negative experiences with health care providers and 
other aspects of the health care system, and cultural expectations of kin and 
community members. Implications for further research and clinical practice 
will be discussed.


\\\\\
Cognition, Depression, Function, and Behavior Outcomes Among Urban Elders 
Receiving a Multidisciplinary Team Intervention

Jane B. Neese

Providing health care for the graying population of America has become a 
national concern. In 1990, 12.6% of the U.S. population was 65 years and 
older, with the fastest growing age group being 85 years and older. Among 
those aged 85 years and older, more than 80% have at least one chronic health 
condition and many have several. The rising proportion of frail elderly at 
risk for chronic diseases creates a growing epidemic of chronic mental and 
physical disabling conditions. For nursing and the delivery of health care, 
the implications of this aging population is dramatic. How do we provide 
effective health care to the elderly who have complex physical and 
psychological problems within the context of decreasing health care dollars? 
In developing innovative service delivery models, what are the patient 
outcomes of services rendered?

This ongoing pilot study focuses on determining the similarities and 
differences in cognition, function, depression, and behavior characteristics 
between impoverished urban elders residing in public housing who received 
multidisciplinary team health services and those elders who do not receive 
similar services. The multidisciplinary team comprises two nurses, one nurse 
specializing in geriatric health and the other nurse specializing in 
psychiatric and mental health nursing, and one social worker. This study is a 
cross-sectional study with a static-group comparison design. A 
randomly-selected sample of 25 urban elders age 60 years and older living in 
public housing who receive a multidisciplinary team interventions were 
compared to randomly-selected sample of 25 urban elders living in public 
housing who do not receive the same services. The independent variables 
consist of sociodemographic factors (age, race, religious affiliation, gender, 
martial status, household composition, annual income and educational level) 
and health status factors (nutritional status, cognitive status, depression, 
activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, mobility, 
vision, behavior, and hearing). The dependent variable will be whether or not 
the individual uses the multidisciplinary team. Descriptive statistics and X2 
will be calculated to determine the differences in cognition, depression, 
function, and behavior of the urban elders using the multidisciplinary team 
intervention and those elders not receiving any formal service intervention. 
Nursing implications will be discussed in depth in the presentation.


\\\\\
Home Care Following Hospitalization of Elderly Rural Patients with Chronic 
Diseases: Evaluation of Changes in Perceived Health Status on Fluctuations in 
Utilization and Cost of Formal and Informal Services

Marcella J. Griggs

Policy efforts to control costs mean that an appropriate balance between 
formal and informal caregiving systems must be created, but few studies have 
examined the costs associated with caring for chronically-ill older adults in 
their homes. Research questions addressed: 1) whether Global Health Status and 
Functional Health Status values change over the course of an illness episode 
for both patients and in-home primary caregivers; 2) whether Burden of Care 
values change for caregivers during the course of an illness episode; and, 3) 
whether Formal and Informal Service Utilization and Cost Distributions differ 
between groups of patients who get better and those who get worse during the 
course of an illness episode.

A comparative prospective panel design was used to interview a sample of 21 
chronically-ill patients and their 21 primary caregivers on admission to a 
Medicare-certified home health care agency, at termination of skilled 
services, and 30 days after discharge. Health status measures included the 
Sickness Impact Profile, ADLs, IADLs, and Burden of Care. Formal services and 
costs were evaluated using visits made and charges billed to Medicare and/or 
Medicaid. Informal services and costs were evaluated using hours of assistance 
provided with ADLs and IADLs and regional hourly wage rates. The data were 
analyzed using within-subjects repeated measures ANOVAs.

Health status of patients changed significantly across time, with patients who 
got better showing improved health status but continued difficulty with ADLs 
and IADLs. Burden of Care did not change statistically over time. Formal 
service costs were higher for patients who got worse compared to those who got 
better. Patients received 4.4 mean hours of informal services per day. 
Intensity of informal services was greater during initial home care services; 
however, intensity remained the same and did not change for those who got 
worse. The average cost per patient day was $47 for formal services and $44 
for informal services. This study revealed a highly impaired patient group 
with dedicated informal caregivers spending an average of 31 hours each week 
helping with ADLs and IADLs in addition to the visits made by formal service 
providers. The findings from this study have importance for public policy and 
clinical practice with regard to forging realistic linkages between both the 
formal and informal support systems as patients move from one provider system 
to the next.


\\\\\
Monitoring Fever's Path of Destruction in Home and Hospital

Barbara J. Holtzclaw

The management of febrile symptoms is a significant problem affecting 
virtually all persons living with AIDS (PLWA). While medical management treats 
the underlying infection, nursing fever management is directed at 
symptomatology, regardless of etiology. There are presently no widely held 
standards for care of febrile symptoms. Common approaches that cool patients 
are counterproductive and distressful. Cooling during the chill phase of fever 
evokes warming responses that increase oxygen consumption and 
cardiorespiratory effort. Methods to keep the patient hydrated during fever 
are often implemented after-the-fact, when the patient is severely desiccated. 
A comprehensive study of febrile symptom management was implemented after 
funding by the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR) in 1994. The 
study follows subjects from inpatient hospitalization with febrile illness, to 
home and outpatient status. The need for continuity between measurements made 
in these diverse settings led to communication between hospital and home 
health caregivers. The difference between inpatient sophisticated measurement 
instruments and those used by the patient for self monitoring is addressed. 
The use of home followup as a stimulus for self monitoring is also emphasized. 
Three discrete methodological issues that affect research in febrile symptom 
management are presented in this symposium. They include, monitoring of 
febrile patterns and hydration in hospitalized PLWAs, measurement of shivering 
severity and duration, and cultural and ethnic aspects of home fever 
management in PLWA.


\\\\\
Monitoring Fever Patterns and Hydration in Hospitalized PLWA

Donna H. Taliaferro

Little has been documented about the patterns and non-specific responses 
associated with fever in persons living with AIDS (PLWA). These 
cytokine-modulated effects often generate "hectic" febrile courses, with 
precipitous rises and declines within short spans of time. In order to 
quantify relationships between febrile symptoms, it is necessary to make 
contact with the subject at the onset of temperature rise and collect data 
throughout the episode. To study the effects of fever on hydration in PLWA, an 
assessment of pre-existing water loss must occur prior to the onset of a 
particular febrile event. Identifying the start and finish of a febrile 
episode has been problematic, using routine temperature-taking schedules. 
Waiting for unit personnel to notify the study team results in observations 
that begin mid-episode, or during fever defervescence.

Specific Aims: In a NINR/NIH funded study of febrile symptom management, pilot 
work was done to determine 1) the extent to which the temperatures taken 
routinely on the hospital AIDS unit captured temperature elevations during an 
8 hour shift; 2) patterns and frequency of fever elevations in PLWA 
inpatients; 3) changes in hydration following febrile episodes; and 4) 
relationships between hydration and severity of temperature elevations during 
fever.

Methods: Subjects (n=35) were enrolled on admission to the HIV/AIDS unit of a 
southwestern university-based hospital. Daily rounds were made by 
investigators and oral temperatures recorded from routine once-a-shift 
measurements on patient charts. Temperatures were taken mid-shift by the study 
team. If readings were over 37 degress C, temperatures were repeated at 15 
minute intervals until the direction of rise or fall was determined. If 
temperatures continued climbing, the patient was monitored continuously 
throughout the febrile episode. Baseline weights were obtained. Hydration was 
assessed on admission by physical exam of skin and tissue turgor, eyeball 
resistance, and moisture of tongue and mucous membranes. Weight and hydration 
was assessed 12 hours post febrile episode.

Findings and Implications: Routine once-a-shift measurement of body 
temperatures fail to capture significant numbers of febrile episodes. To 
detect episodes of fever at the onset, close vigilance is necessary at the 
first sign of temperature rise.  Hydration is influenced by many factors in 
PLWA, other than fever. Febrile patterns are hectic and intermittent in 
nature, often accompanied by profuse sweating.


\\\\\
Monitoring Febrile Shivering in PLWA: Methodological Approaches

Barbara J. Holtzclaw

Fever is a nearly universal symptom of the many opportunistic infections 
experienced by persons living with AIDS (PLWA). Regardless of the offending 
organism, a complex of hypermetabolism, energy expenditure, dehydration, and 
desiccation often follows. Shivering plays a major role in generating elevated 
body tempwature. When opportunistic infection occurs, release of endogenous 
pyrogen (EP) from host cells is triggered by interleukins and other cytokines, 
which are elevated in PLWA despite declining T-lymphocytes. EP resets the 
hypothalamic thermoregulatory set-point to a new level, higher than the 
patients existing temperature. Chilling ensures and warming responses are 
initiated. Shivering generates heat, while vasoconstriction serves to conserve 
it. The measurement of shivering onset and severity has been a significant 
part of this investigator's program of research, yet the monitoring of this 
variable has inherent difficulties. In an ongoing study of febrile symptom 
management in PLWA, specific methodological approaches were taken to quantify, 
validate, and prepare data collectors in the measurement of shivering.

Specific Aims: Piloting of the measurement was designed to: 1) quantify 
shivering on an ordinal scale with objective indicators for each level, 2) use 
a physiological indicator to verify the onset of shivering; 3) test data 
collectors for inter-rater reliability in shivering observations; 4) identify 
any problems in shivering detection and monitoring that would complicate the 
study.

Methods: Using data from previous studies of febrile shivering in 
immunosuppressed patients, a protocol was developed. An ordinal shivering 
scale was refined from 5 previous studies of shivering. Electromyographic 
(EMG) signals from the masseters were monitored continuously during febrile 
episodes to detect the earliest non-visible masseter contractions (stage 1), 
increasing stages (2 through 4) were observable by progressive cephalad-to-
caudal muscle involvement. Data collectors were trained in shivering 
observation in two settings: 1) with an actor simulating shivering at various 
stages; 2) with actual patients shivering in postoperative or febrile 
situations.

Findings and implications: Progressive stages of muscle involvement provide 
the most consistent unit of measuring shivering in the clinical setting. 
Surface EMG offers limited means of shivering quantification because of: 1) 
variations from one muscle to another; 2) electrical interference from the 
environment; and 3) artifact from nonshivering muscle movement. However, the 
pattern and bursts of masseter contractions in the 100 to 500 microvolt range 
serves as a reliable and objective indicator of shivering onset.


\\\\\
Cultural and Ethnic Aspects of Home Fever Management in PLWA

Beverly H. Robinson

Opportunistic infections with fever commonly complicate the condition of 
persons living with Acquired lmmunodeficiency Syndrome (PLWA). Despite 
immunosuppression, PLWA are known to experience severe febrile responses. 
Nurses in community settings are often challenged by the balance of 
traditional Western medical therapies and cultural and/or ethnic customs and 
practices. These approaches may coexist peacefully, augmenting one another, or 
be in therapeutic opposition. Therefore, the nature of both the febrile course 
and the prevailing modes of home treatment are of crucial importance to the 
health care provider.

Specific Aims: Almost no data exist about how fever/fever management is viewed 
among ethnic/minority populations. Therefore, this study was designed to 
provide information about 1) the meaning of fever, 2) use of folk/traditional 
medicine for fever care, 3) beliefs about causes of fever and 4) the 
perception of successful fever treatment.

Methods: The unit of sampling was the family of subjects (n=35) who were PLWA 
enrolled in a comprehensive study of febrile symptom management. Subjects, 
caregivers and significant others included Hispanic, African American and 
Anglo men and women. Open-ended interviews that encouraged PLWA and their 
caregivers to disclose treatment methods were used to obtain pertinent 
information about folk methods for fever management at home. This naturalistic 
data of verbatim responses provide text for content analysis, as described by 
Krippendorff, of fever management practices. Culturally-based practices of the 
patient and caregivers must be understood and acknowledged as having value 
before decisions about intervention strategies for fever management can be 
appropriately and successfully implemented.

Findings: While no inferences can be drawn from these qualitative data, the 
symbolic importance of the tradition, the context in which the meaning or 
belief is held, and the influence these beliefs play on the person's practice 
of fever care holds important cues to assessment and interventions of PLWA in 
home settings. Some beliefs are religious in origin, others are superstitions, 
still others seem based in tradition, rather than any known contingencies.

Implications: The person's perception of disease and treatment also influence 
their perceptions of symptoms. The nurse caregiver must work in concert with 
the person/family's belief system to keep the patient actively engaged in 
effective symptom management. The fact that fevers are often self-limiting may 
add to the family's perception that folk remedies are effective.


\\\\\
Predictors of Alcohol Use Among Rural Adolescents

Gwen M. Felton, Mary Ann Parsons, Robert Valois, Russell Pate, Dianne Ward, 
Marsha Dowda, Ruth Saunders, and Stuart Trost

Alcohol use is common in adolescence. Recent studies suggest that use may 
begin as early as age ten. However, less is known about alcohol use during 
early adolescence, particularly among rural youths. This study examined the 
association between risk indicators and alcohol use, including experimental 
use, in a sample (N=336) of fifth graders in two rural school districts in the 
southeast. The students raged in age from 9 to 12 (M=10) and were 53% female 
and 74% African- American. Data were collected using instruments designed to 
assess the health behaviors of students, peers, and family members. 
Approximately 36% (n=122) reported alcohol use. Multiple Logistic regression 
was used to identify risk indicators, i.e., age, gender, race, cigarette 
smoking, physical activity, and alcohol use by parents/surrogates and peer. A 
four factor model resulted. Alcohol use was strongly associated with smoking 
(OR=11.99, 95% CI=5.9, 24.3). Among the sociodemographic variables, male 
gender had an OR of 3.78 (95% CI=2.2, 6.7) and father's alcohol use also 
predicted use (OR=2.75, 95% CI=1.6, 4.8). An odds ratio of 0.73(95% CI=0.5, 
1.03) for physical activity may indicate that students who were more 
physically active were less likely use alcohol. Among users many had only one 
or two episodes, 18% reported weekend and holiday use, and 3% reported weekend 
and weekday use. Of the parental behaviors, only father's alcohol use 
contributed to the model with 72% having fathers who used alcohol. The 
frequency of father's use included "sometimes" (45%) and "a lot" (10%). Almost 
25% reported having tried cigarette smoking with 4% initiating smoking by age 
9 or younger compared to 10% who had used alcohol by the same age. Of alcohol 
"users", 53% also smoked. The findings suggest young adolescents should be 
viewed as active decision-makers within the context of their school, family, 
and community environments, rather than as naive children. The extent of 
alcohol and tobacco use calls for school and community health professionals to 
develop programmatic efforts within a comprehensive school health program, 
including community outreach programs focusing on interventions in rural 
areas.


\\\\\
A Phenomenological Study of Homeless Children's Perceptions of Homelessness

Sandra Zehnder, Ptlene Minick, and Myra C. Carmon

For a multitude of reasons, there are an increasing number of families with 
children who are now homeless. In the past research has been done with adults 
and very little with children. The studies that have been done on children 
have been done from the guardian's or researchers perspective. While this 
research does provide useful information, the perception of the children who 
are homeless is missing. The purpose of this study is to describe what it is 
like to be homeless from the school-age child's perspective.

It was thought that these children were unable to know how they felt and 
therefore were unable to relate and describe their experiences and needs.

The phenomenological research approach investigates the lived experience of 
the individual. Data was gathered through group interviews. In-depth 
audiotaped group interviews were conducted with six children who are homeless 
for six meetings for a total of 36 interviews. This research team used 
thematic analysis to identify prominent themes from the audiotaped interviews.

After Institutional Review Board approval and consent for the study had been 
obtained from the administrative staff at the day care center, mothers and 
children were identified by the day care staff of potential participants. As 
participants were recruited, the technique of snow-balling was used to recruit 
other volunteers.

In this study it was found that living in a shelter has positive aspects while 
at the same time difficult for the school-age child and hindering their 
psychosocial development. There was a strong need for approval and their 
greatest fear was that their peers would discover that they were living in a 
shelter and ridicule them.

Children are knowers and are able to relate and describe their experiences and 
needs. With the incidence of homelessness of children increasing, it is 
important for nurses and other health-care workers to listen to the children 
and be cognizant of their needs and accept them for their achievements to gain 
cooperation in their care. Through understanding their experiences as they 
perceive them, we as health-care providers are in a better position to meet 
their needs.


\\\\\
The Relationship Between Self-Care Agency, Self-Care, and Health in the 
Pregnant Adolescent

Dee Stonebraker

Adolescence is a developmental period during which social and cognitive skills 
for decision making and responsible self-care are developed. However, despite 
concerns about personal health, adolescents do not behave in ways congruent 
with these expressed concerns. While a theoretical link has been established 
between Orem's concepts of self-care agency, self-care and health in adults. 
These relationships have not been thoroughly studied in the adolescent 
population. Therefere the purpose of this descriptive study is to determine 
the relationship between basic conditioning factors, self-care agency, 
self-care and health in pregnant adolescents, 12-19 years old.

Prenatal adolescent clinics at two research sites were used to select 100 
adolescents by convenience nonprobability sampling. The typical subject was 
black (50%), single (78.8%), attending school (60.6%) and in the 10th grade 
(28.6%).

Instruments included a Demographic Data Sheet and the Denyes' Self-Care 
Agency, Self-Care Practice, and Health Status. Data analysis included 
descriptive, correlational and stepwise multiple regression.

No significant correlations were found between selected basic conditioning 
factors (e.g. age, siblings, birth order, marital status and ethnicity) and 
self -care. A significant correlation was found between self-care agency and 
self-care (r=.7648, p<.001) as well as self-care and health (r=.7650, p<.001). 
Results of a multiple regression analysis revealed that two subscales of 
self-care agency (ego strength and health decision-making capability; and 
attention to health) accounted for 59% of the variance of self-care. Together 
self-care agency and self-care accounted for 61% of the variance of health.

The responsibility of nurses and adolescents is to appreciate and strengthen 
beneficial self-care practices, encourage the replacement of inappropriate 
ones and foster self-care with accessible professional care. Adolescents 
should be given a variety of opportunities to strengthen their decision-making 
capabilities and ego strength.


\\\\\
Adolescents and the Taks of Pregnancy

Michele H. Salisbury

Background: Rub in described four tasks of pregnancy that accompany prenatal 
role attainment in the adult pregnant woman; however, she doubted the ability 
of adolescents to engage in these tasks and thereby attain the maternal role 
particularly in the prenatal period. Three tasks occur before the birth of the 
baby: seeking safe passage, ensuring acceptance by significant others and 
binding in to the child. The study will use a qualitative approach and Rubin's 
tasks of pregnancy to explore the adolescent's engagement in the tasks of 
pregnancy and thereby their progress toward attainment of the maternal role.

Method: Thirty-two adolescents between the ages of 13 and 18 in the third 
trimester of pregnancy were recruited and interviewed at a public health 
department. The mean age was 17.1; 27 were white and 5 were Black. 
Twenty-three were primigravidas, and 3 were having their third baby. After 
birth of the baby, the researcher did a chart review to ascertain outcome 
pregnancy data: birthweight, maternal weight gain and number of prenatal 
visits.

Results: Seeking safe passage: 19 of the 32 adolescents sought prenatal care 
in the first trimester of pregnancy. Furthermore, the adolescents stated they 
had changed behaviors to help safeguard their own health and that of their 
unborn baby. Ensuring acceptance by significant others: initial fear of 
negative reactions of family members to the pregnancy is a barrier to seeking 
safe passage, nevertheless, by the end of the pregnancy, all adolescents had 
negotiated support for themselves -- 14 with their mothers but others with 
sisters, aunts or other family members. Binding in to the unborn child: these 
adolescents extended the search for safe passage to the remainder of the 
pregnancy. The mean number of prenatal visits for the participants was 12.4; 
they gained a mean weight of 35 pounds and their babies had a mean weight of 
3388 grams: all parameters that are at the upper end of normal limits.

Discussion: This study provides evidence that adolescents engage in the tasks 
of pregnancy. Rubin's apprehension that adolescents would be unable to 
complete the tasks of pregnancy and therefore be unable to progress toward 
attainment of the maternal role is unfounded for this sample. Nevertheless, it 
does suggest that for adolescents, the task of ensuring acceptance by 
significant others assumes heightened importance because it seems that safe 
passage cannot be undertaken until the adolescent negotiates at least some 
rudimentary acceptance. Nurses working in prenatal clinics or family planning 
clinics where pregnancy tests are done need to be aware of the possibility of 
this occurrence and be able to counsel the adolescent about strategies to use 
with their families.


\\\\\
Critical Pathways: Effectiveness in Achieving Patient Outcomes

Carol L. Ireson

While nurses are expected to develop written care plans on all hospitalized 
patients, there are few studies of the relationship of this process to patient 
outcomes. The purpose of this research was to examine the effect of 
structuring the evaluation of subgoals, inherent in the critical pathway 
process, on outcomes achieved by patients with total hip or knee replacements. 
A critical pathway is a structured patient care plan that provides optimal 
sequencing and timing of interventions for a particular diagnosis or 
procedure, and the expected patient responses to those interventions.

The framework for this study was a conceptualization of the link between 
process and outcome in evaluating quality of care. The hypothesis was that 
patients whose care is planned and evaluated using a critical pathway will 
achieve better clinical outcomes; including greater self-care ability, 
ambulation, and lower psychological distress; a shorter hospital stay; and 
lower hospital charges than patients having care planned and evaluated 
according to the standard procedure.

The experimental group included 64 subjects recruited from the orthopedic unit 
at a 450-bed community hospital for comparison with data from a control group 
of 64 subjects recruited from the same site. A repeated measures, pre-test, 
post-test, quasi-experimental design was used. Data from the experimental 
group were collected on the first post-operative day and one day prior to 
discharge from the hospital as were the data from the control group. Post 
discharge data on the same patient outcomes were collected from a random 
sample from the experimental and control groups. Data analysis included 
bivariate analyses of group for similarities in sex, age, type of procedure, 
and mutivariate analyses of each patient outcome variable.

Those participants with a critical pathway achieved better quality outcomes on 
the first post-operative evening and at discharge than did those with the 
traditional care planning process. The critical pathway group also experienced 
a shorter hospitalization. The charges for the critical pathway group were not 
significantly lower. The results of this study may provide valuable 
information regarding the design of the process for planning, evaluating, and 
documenting patient care, and directions for structuring the care planning and 
documentation process in on-line nursing information systems.


\\\\\
Development of the Nursing Management Diagnosis Ineffective Change Management

Ruby Shaw Morrison

Diagnosing the problems of nursing organizational units is essential to 
effective management decision making, just as diagnosing actual or potential 
health problems is essential for planning effective nursing care. Nursing 
management diagnosis is a judgment about nursing organizational problems that 
provides a basis for nurse manager interventions to achieve outcomes for which 
the nurse manager is accountable. A nursing organizational problem is a 
discrepancy between what should be happening and what is actually happening 
that prevents the goals of nursing from being accomplished in the 
organization. In a previous study 72 nursing management diagnoses were 
identified from problems and judgments described by nurse managers. 
Subsequently, these diagnoses were validated and prioritized. The nursing 
management diagnosis "ineffective change management" was validated by 97.8% of 
the 136 nurse managers participants. A priority score, calculated from the 
frequency of occurrence and level of disruption associated with the diagnosis, 
indicated that ineffective change management was a very high priority with a 
score of 7.837 on a scale of 1 to 10.

The purpose of this study was to develop the definition, defining 
characteristics and interventions for the nursing management diagnosis 
"ineffective change management". Focus group discussions were conducted with 
two  groups of nurse managers (n=17) to identify etiologies, defining 
characteristics, and interventions for the diagnosis. Literature review and 
analysis of interviews resulted in defining ineffective change management as 
the state in which activities that are designed to improve individuals, 
groups, or organizations were unsuccessful in meeting goals, were inefficient 
in use of resources and/or resulted in dissatisfaction.

Etiologies of ineffective change management included lack of Iong range 
vision, poor communication, failure to include persons responsible for 
implementing change in the planning of change, failure to evaluate change in 
progress and make adjustments as needed, unclear expectations, incorrect 
assessment and diagnosis of organization and the impact of change, inadequate 
time to plan for change, and too many changes concurrently. Defining 
characteristics include organizational issues (such as decreased productivity, 
negative public image, decreased cost effectiveness, and disorganization), 
personal issues of staff and managers (such as increased stress, decreased 
morale and job satisfaction, self doubt, and frustration), and consumer issues 
(such as dissatisfaction with service and mistrust). Interventions focused on 
reversing the etiologies, primarily communicate clearly, involve others in all 
phases of the change process, and provide the support needed to implement 
change. Nurse manager responsibilities for implementing change effectively 
could be enhanced by using the findings from this study.


\\\\\
Quality Nursing Care in the Hospital Versus the Home A Question of "Locus" of 
Control

Mary R. Lynn

While the provision of optimum care to patients is cleariy a professional 
obligation of nurses, it is considerably less clear how quality care should be 
evaluated, or who should be involved in the evaluation. From the premise that 
the provider and the recipient Of care are essential evaluators of the quality 
of nursing care, a series of studies have been conducted to elicit the 
perspectives of these partners in the care exchange. This paper will address a 
comparison of these perspectives when nursing care is delivered in a hospital 
setting versus the increasingly common home setting.

All studies were based on the same method: qualitative interviews of patients 
and registered nurses were conducted to determine their perceptions and 
definitions of quality nursing care. Using the grounded theory method, a 
single grand-tour question (How do you describe or define good nursing care?) 
was posed, followed up by intensive questioning designed to determine the full 
extent of the informant's possible responses and illustrations. Interviews 
were audio-taped and literally transcribed. Constant comparative analysis 
formed the basis for the generation of categories of responses as well as more 
general concepts from the data.

In the hospital-based studies a total of 20 registered nurses and 20 patients 
on medical-surgical units were interviewed. Conceptual categories from the 
interviews included themes related to the concept of caring (e.g., getting to 
know the patient, being mindful, nurturance) and to vigilance (e.g., 
responsiveness) emerged. In the home health study a total of 16 people were 
interviewed - 9 patients and 7 nurses. The patients had been in home health 
care for an average of 17 months, had a variety of medical and surgical 
diagnoses, and were primarily cared for by a family member in their home. The 
central process in this study, negotiated care, refers to the understanding 
that, unlike the hospital, the patient shares the responsibility with the 
nurse for the care exchange.

Negotiated care differs markedly from the quality care process in the acute 
care setting in that, while the nurse in the acute care setting is largely in 
control, the nurse in the home setting is a genuine partner in the care 
exchange. She/he may be looked to for the same attentive behavior the acute 
care nurse is expected to display, but she/he is no longer in the catbird 
seat. In the home health setting the nurse is the "guest" and while she has 
the "authority" in the care exchange, the patient and family become empowered 
by their familiar surroundings or their ability to "not do" if they so choose. 
Therefore, in contrast to the hospital based nurse's control over the care 
exchange, it is incumbent upon the home health nurse to help the patient 
decide what care regimen is for them and how they will enact it.

As nursing care moves from the hospital to the home setting it is essential 
that nurses understand the shift in control over the care exchange from the 
provider to a negotiation between the provider and recipient of care.


\\\\\
Cognitive Status in Medically Hosptialized Patients: Nursing Documentation vs. 
Standardized Assessment

Elaine Souder

Purpose: Although nursing literature discusses the importance of assessing 
mental status, little research has addressed nurses' observations of cognitive 
impairment, or the concordance of nurses' detection of cognitive status and 
standardized assessment. The purpose of this study was to examine patient 
charts for nursing documentation of impaired cognitive functioning and compare 
nursing notations with information gained by standardized measurement.

Subjects: The sample consisted of 42 patients ranging in age from 35-74 years 
(M= 51.9; SD=10.1) hospitalized on a general medical unit at a university 
medical center. Inclusion criteria included English-speaking adults receiving 
medical treatment. Patients who had evidence of altered consciousness, i.e., 
confusion, dementia, organic brain syndrome, depression, or mental retardation 
noted on the physician's admission note were excluded from study. Additional 
exclusion criteria included administration of narcotics within past 24 hours, 
illiteracy, inability to speak, or difficulty in hearing.

Methods: A prospective descriptive design was utilized for this study. Data 
were collected by two research assistants. After the first RA determined 
eligibility, obtained informed consent, and reviewed nursing records, a second 
RA who was a licensed psychological test examiner blinded to chart 
information, administered the following standardized assessments: Clock 
Drawing Test, Neurobehavioral Cognitive State Examination (NCSE), Standardized 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and WAIS Block Design Scale. Data were 
analyzed and summarized using SPSS software.

Findings: A review of nurses' notes and flow sheets revealed no documentation 
of impaired cognitive status on the 42 subjects. In fact, each record examined 
had at least several notations, "alert and oriented x3", but no further 
information on cognitive status was found.

The Clock Drawing Test, a simple cognitive screening measure, revealed 
impairment in 24% of the subjects. Similarly, 54% of the sample had 
significant deficits on one or more sub-scales of the NCSE. The mean MMSE 
score was 27 (total 30); however, 21% scored 24 or below indicating impaired 
mental status. On the Block Design, 34% received a scaled score of 6 or below 
indicating performance two standard deviations below the reference age group.

Interestingly, there was no significant age difference in 20 subjects with 
impairments in two or more tests (M=53.1, SD=9.9) compared to 22 subjects with 
normal cognitive performance (M=50.8, SD=10.5), p=.47.

Implications: The absence of nursing documentation of cognitive impairment in 
the presence of performance deficits on standardized measures may reflect lack 
of attention to this parameter of functioning or inability to detect cognitive 
impairment using informal clinical observation skills. These findings suggest 
that nurses should not assume intact cognitive status when gathering patient 
data and teaching patients complex medication and treatment regimes. This is 
especially important in an era of shorter hospitalizations characterized by 
sicker patients. A simple cognitive screening measure, such as the Clock 
Drawing Test, would help to identify impaired cognitive status when present.


\\\\\
Bending the Tenets of Experimental Design to Achieve Cultural Compatibility

Merle H. Mishel

As nursing moves to intervention research, the profession must address the 
design and implementation of interventions for the underserved and not solely 
attend to the easy to access and available typical Caucasian middle class 
subject. In this symposium we will present efforts to address the needs of 
underserved and understudied minority populations and discuss the threats 
these efforts raise concerning principles of traditional experimental design. 
Two intervention trials, Management of Uncertainty in Prostate Cancer 
(RO1NR/CA03782-03) and Management of Uncertainty in Older Women with Breast 
Cancer (RO1CA57764-03) are being conducted to examine the racial/ethnic 
differences in the efficacy of a 10 week telephone delivered 
psycho-educational intervention for reducing uncertainty, enhancing self-care, 
improving psycho-social adjustment, reducing emotional distress and improving 
quality of life. The study populations include women over 50 with breast 
cancer newly diagnosed at any stage who are undergoing treatment and men with 
stage B or C prostate cancer who are recovering from surgery or undergoing 
radiation. The goal for composition of both studies is equal numbers of 
African-American and Caucasian subjects.

In the design of studies to address the underserved, the investigative team 
must confront some of the traditional rules for experimental design. Issues in 
revision of instruments for compatibility with local dialects and cultural 
orientation include the global versus specific construct validity of concepts 
under study, use of multiple indicators for assessing concepts, and approaches 
for assessing specificity of measures when modified for a specific population.

Areas that are often poorly elaborated in intervention research become 
priority areas when working with the underserved. The importance of attention 
to recruitment and retention will be discussed from the position of removing 
sources of error using Lipsey's work on design sensitivity. The importance of 
involving multiple stake holders in the recruitment of subjects will be 
discussed from the perspective of balancing a community involvement 
orientation with the notion of controlling for sources of error. Similarly 
retention efforts are more elaborate when samples are not those traditionally 
involved in research. Traditional experimental design has to be balanced with 
a naturalistic paradigm that allows for the relationship between investigator 
and subject. The integration of a naturalistic perspective into the retention 
effort for a clinical trial is a new notion to be presented.

Determining the integrity of an intervention that flows and undulates as new 
information about the underserved sample is learned requires a view of 
intervention as evolving and not static. The threat that this causes to 
traditional views of experimental design will be discussed integrating 
principles form naturalistic methodologies.


\\\\\
Issues in Revising Research Instruments for Use With Southern and African-
American Populations

Lorna Harris, Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, and Sheron Sumner

This presentation will focus on the concerns explored in adapting instruments 
used for data collection in a study to test a psycho-educational intervention 
for Southern men and women receiving treatment for cancer. The nursing 
literature in recent years has given increasing attention to the production of 
research that is both culturally sensitive and scientifically sound. Striving 
to develop research that meet both goals has proven to be a challenge because 
those individuals conducting the research have most often been socialized into 
a Western middle-class perspective and have received limited orientation to 
perspectives of other cultures.

Culturally sensitive research implies that the perspectives of the study 
population are reflected in shaping all aspects of the research, including 
instrumentation. Issues that must be considered include an awareness of 
regional and ethnic group differences in the use of language and its 
implication on the revision of instruments, the use of instruments to acquire 
information about the cultural values and norms of the study population and 
determining whether instruments are able to convey, in culturally meaningful 
terms, the intent of the instrument.

The Southern culture has an English based language that is permeated with 
phraseology that reflects the influence of all the various peoples who have 
populated the region. Because of the rural and isolated nature of many 
Southern communities, those within communities are believed to have more 
similarities in language and perspectives regardless of ethnic background, 
especially among the poor. African-Americans in the region have also been 
found to have their own dialects. These issues paired with the low literacy 
rate in the South require careful examination of instruments for 
understandability by the research subjects and close attention to the 
sometimes subtle changes needed in revising the wording of instruments. A 
description of how this was accomplished in the study will be given.

Another important issue concerns cultural similarities and disparities between 
the researchers and the study population and how to bridge the gap in cultural 
knowledge for the researchers. Instruments can be used to provide information 
about the norms, beliefs and values of a population, but these scales may not 
give additional insight into the research outcomes. Information about specific 
regional populations is limited in the nursing literature or given in such 
general terms that the researchers find it of little use in understanding the 
nuances of the culture. Instruments used for this purpose will be identified 
and their usefulness discussed.

The last issue to be examined is how to identify whether concepts and their 
measures are culturally meaningful to the population being studied. This is an 
important area because values and priorities often differ between cultures. If 
cultural meaningfulness is not determined, instruments may represent concepts 
and perspectives that are foreign to the culture under investigation or 
completely omit concepts that are important to the culture of research 
subjects.


\\\\\
Recruitment of Minority Subjects for Nursing Research

Barbara B. Germino, Merle H. Mishel, Lorna Harris, and Sheron Sumner

Minorities are often poorly represented in health research (Graham, 1992). 
Trials of behavioral interventions to promote coping with cancer are notorious 
for their lack of representative samples. The purpose of this paper is to 
describe three levels of strategies evolved to enhance the recruitment of 
African-American men and women as subjects in two nursing intervention 
studies: planning, design and implementation strategies.

In planning the trials, problems recruiting minority subjects, in particular 
rural and elderly minority subjects, were anticipated. A minority 
co-investigator was an active member of the team from the initial preparation 
of proposals for funding. Literature on minority recruitment was critically 
reviewed and the few suggested strategies were considered. Other investigators 
in the state who had been or were in the process of studying African-Americans 
were consulted for suggestions. Strategies planned in the design phase 
included selection of sites that maximized numbers of potential minority 
subjects; use of multiple sites; matching of recruiter/data collectors to 
subjects by gender and race; matching of nurses delivering the telephone 
intervention to subjects by gender and race; adaptation of study instruments 
to a population with high levels of semi- literacy and illiteracy as well as 
to colloquialisms common in the region among the populations to be studied. 
Once the study was implemented and the first six months of data collection had 
been completed, it was evident that, in spite of these strategies, a number of 
additional barriers to inclusion of minority subjects existed and there were 
at least two distinct kinds of recruitment problems. For elderly women with 
breast cancer, in spite of increasing the number of sites with the largest 
populations, the numbers of older African-American women being diagnosed with 
breast cancer were much smaller than anticipated. Once identified, these women 
were generally willing to participate in the study; refusal rates were very 
low. For African-American men with prostate cancer, the numbers anticipated 
were available but the refusal rate for participation reached 50%. Barriers 
which became evident as the study progressed included lack of adequate and 
accurate information about breast and prostate cancer in the African-American 
community, especially among elderly African-Americans; longstanding distrust 
of the health care system and suspicion about participation in research 
studies; lack of economic or other perceived benefits of participating in 
research. While some of these problems were mentioned in the literature and by 
other investigators, the extent and intensity of the barriers was not clear 
until the study was underway. Using knowledge of these barriers and their 
roots in cultural belief systems, additional strategies have been developed to 
enhance minority recruitment. Hiring of community workers who are respected 
and visible members of the communities in which recruitment is ongoing builds 
on existing relationships and provides a bridge between African-Americans and 
the university based study. Specific strategies designed to enhance community 
awareness of breast and prostate cancer, provide participation incentives and 
enhance visibility will be discussed.


\\\\\
Interventions Sensitive to Regional and Cultural Issues

Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, Lorna Harris, and Sheron Sumner

The purpose of this paper is to describe the culturally specific issues that 
emerged when a nursing intervention for breast and prostate cancer patients 
was delivered to a sammple who differed both regionally and culturally from 
those on whom the intervention was previously tested. The intervention is 
being delivered to rural southerners both Caucasian and African-American men 
with prostate cancer and women with breast cancer with special attention to 
older individuals. Whereas the original testing of the intervention had been 
with primarily a middle aged Caucasian middle class sample of breast cancer 
patients located in the Southwest, the intervention has been modified for 
applicability to a different population.

The importance of testing an intervention on a variety of patients is to 
determine the generalizability of the program, the robustness of the 
intervention strategies across culture, social class and race and the cultural 
compatibility of the intervention.

Although the testing of interventions on non-whites is considered important, 
African-Americans and low income individuals are present in less then 10% of 
the studies on psycho-social interventions for cancer (Anderson, 1992). The 
number of studies that include a sufficient number of African-Americans to 
analyze by race has declined in the last 20 years (Graham, 1992). Such a trend 
indicates that psycho-education interventions may move into nursing practice 
with insufficient study for their applicability to the range of patients 
seeking care.

In the planning stage of the current intervention studies, modification of the 
intervention required identifying the components that were not culturally or 
regionally compatible. Specific attention was given to identifying cultural 
beliefs about cancer and cancer treatments. The specific strategies used to 
achieve culture compatibility will be discussed.

In the intervention phase of the study, it was evident that attempts at 
achieving cultural relevance were incomplete. Additional issues emerged which 
included the interplay of religious beliefs and acceptance of medical care, 
the impact of financial restrictions on ability to manage side effects of 
treatment by physicians among African-American and Caucasian patients, 
limitations in social resources, cultural beliefs about managing symptoms, 
cultural norms about discussing sexual dysfunction and alternative expressions 
of intimacy, cultural norms about accepting help and discussing topics such as 
incontinence. These topics and others that emerged in the delivery of the 
intervention will be discussed in the paper.

New interventions had to be developed and prior strategies had to be modified 
to address the culturally specific topics that emerged. These strategies will 
be presented such as the use of faith and religion as a source of support, 
gradual introduction of suggestions for expressing sexual intimacy, resources 
for handling employment discrimination and others.


\\\\\
Innovative Approaches to Retention of Minority Subjects

Sheron Sumner, Merle H. Mishel, Barbara B. Germino, Lorna Harris

This paper will address the methods being utilized to enhance retention in two 
nursing intervention studies with older men with prostate cancer and women 
with breast cancer. The two studies are very similar in ethnic distribution of 
the sample, inclduing an equal number of European-American and Afrianc-
American subjects, and in the design protocol and intervention. All subjects 
are enrolled in the studies for nine months with data collection occurring at 
recruitment into the study, four months later and three months following the 
second data collection. Since subjects are in the study for nine months, 
maintaining their interest and willingness to participate in data collection 
and receive the intervention is a primary concern. Older persons are less 
familiar with psycho-educational research and older African-Americans may be 
less trustful of the research endeavor. In order to retain such persons in the 
investigation several retention approaches have been devised and tested. 
Although it is early in the investigation, subjects report that they enjoy 
receiving the retention incentives and view them as caring and thoughtful 
gestures from the research staff.

In the paper the incentives provided for subjecs in each study will be 
discussed. The incentives chosen differ from payment of subjects for 
particiaption but are selected to be attractive to a wide range of 
individuals. Incentive and retntion gifts are selected for cultrual and gender 
compatibility of research subjects, with speical attention to the needs of an 
underserved population. Since older persons may have restrictions on their 
activities and social contacts, we have developed a retention program that 
communicates warmth, caring and attention to the subject as an individual 
person.

Retention materials are organized into four categories. Letters or printed 
materials, gifts, seasonal incentives, and alternative interventions. 
Retention efforts are tracked for each subject through a d-based program that 
includes information on retention efforts as time marks. Time marks include 
data collection dates generated by the program from the first data collection 
entry, monthyly letters and incentives sent, birthday, anniversay and other 
speical occasion dates along with a place for entering seasonal incentives. 
Specific attention is given to community and nationwide efforts such as breast 
cancer or prostate cancer screening months and cancer survivors day during 
which materials relevant to the community or national agenda concerning cancer 
are given to all participants in each study. Ethnic holidays are also 
acknowledged in retention mailings.

Presentation of our retention program will be organized around displaying a 
typical retention program for a subject in the breast cancer intervention 
study and a retention program for patients and their family member in the 
prostate cancer study. Resources used to obtain incentives will be shared with 
the audience as will the computer program established for tracking retention 
activities.

\\\\\
The Influence of Psychosocial Factors on Women's Adjustment to Diabetes

Deborah F. Willoughby

Successful adjustment to a chronic illness such as diabetes mellitus is 
influenced by a variety of psychosocial as well as physiological factors. The 
primary purpose of this study was to examine the extent to which social 
support, personal resources, coping styles, metabolic control, and 
psychosocial adjustment to illness differed among women with diabetes living 
in different kinds of household structure. A second purpose was to explore the 
influence of social support, personal resources, coping styles, and household 
structure on the psychosocial adjustment and metabolic control of women with 
diabetes. Roy's theory of adaptation provided the theoretical framework for 
the study.

The sample included 115 women whose mean age was 48 years and who had diabetes 
for an average of 10 years. The instruments consisted of a demographic data 
form, a measure of social support, a personal resource scale, the Jalowiec 
Coping Scale, the Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale, and self-report 
items for assessing metabolic control and household structure. Multiple 
analysis of variance showed that women living in different types of household 
structures differed in both personal resources and coping skills and that 
women with different levels of metabolic control differed in both personal 
resources and psychosocial adjustment to illness. Higher levels of social 
support were significantly correlated with better personal resources, more 
effective coping skills and better psychosocial adjustment to illness. The use 
of evasive and emotive coping styles was associated with more problems in 
psychosocial adjustment to illness. Discriminant analysis indicated that 
social support, personal resources, household structure, coping skills, and 
psychosocial adjustmet to illness were poor predictors of metabolic control. 
Multiple regression showed that 51% of the variance in psychosical adjustment 
to illness was explained by personal resources, social support, and metabolic 
control.

Findings indicate that household structure, social support, personal 
resources, and coping skills are important factors in the adjustment of women 
to the demands of chronic illness. This knowledge will be sueful for nurses in 
assessing patients and planning interventions. Further research is needed to 
test nursing interventions designed to enhance social support and coping 
skills.


\\\\\
Assessing Physical Activity and Body Size Values of Minority Women

Kelly Mayo

The population of African-American women is more sedentary than any other US 
group (Schoenborn, 1986). In South Carolina, 71% of African-American women are 
sedentary and they are 1.1 times more likely to be obese than their non-
sedentary counterparts (Wheeler, Muneta, Jones & Lane, 1993). However, data 
collection measures used to establish the physical activity of populations 
focus primarilyn on sport an dexercise and may not be appropriate for groups 
who do not participate in these activities. Furthermore, such instruments do 
not consider factors that may impinge upon physical activity. One such factor 
is values about body size. Previous research has found that African-American 
women of lower social status are heavier, view themselves as heavier, and 
perceive attractive body size as heavier than black women of higher social 
status and white women regardless of social status (Allan, Mayo, Michel, 
1993). These findings suggest that physical activity may be related to 
culturally based differences in body size values. New valid and reliable 
measures for assessing physical activity need to be found to address 
ethnically diverse groups in the US.

The specific purposes of this study were to: a) pilot test an instrument 
designed to assess physical activity and b) to establish the relationship 
between the physical activity practices, body size values, and selected socio-
demographic characteristics of a convenience sample of 42 minority women 
attending a health fair in a Southeastern US city.

The Baecke, Burema, and Frijters (1982) instrument for measuring occupational, 
sport, and leisure time physical activity consists of a short questionnaire 
previously tested in the Netherlands. This instrument permits the calculation 
of energy expenditure by considering intensity, duration, and frequency of 
activities. Test-retest reliability using Cronbach's alpha for the 
occupational, sport and leisure time scales was assessed by its developers to 
be .74, .80 and .90 respectively. The Massara and Stunkard (1979) Body Size 
Values Tool (BSVT) consists of 6 photographs deviating from ideal body weight. 
It was used in this study to assess participants' reports of own, ideal, 
healthy, and attractive body sizes. Data were analyzed to discover the 
intensity, frequency, and duration of occupational sport, and leisure physical 
activity of this sample and to relate physical activity practices to body size 
values and sociodemographic characteristics.

Data analysis indicates that the internal consistency of the scales in the 
Baecke, Burema & Frijters instrument is too low for use in this population. 
Problems with the wording of this instrument and its applicability to US 
minority populations will be discussed. The findings from this study will be 
presented with recommendations for future research of physical activity among 
minority groups.


\\\\\
Use of Self-Prescribed Therapies Among Women with HIV

Richard L. Sowell, Joyce Guillory, Brenda Seals, Linda Moneyham, Leland Cohen, 
and Alice Demi

The lack of a cure and the limited effectiveness of treatments for HIV have 
contributed to a reported use ofa variety of self-prescribed therapies or 
alternative treatment approaches by individuals to take control of their 
health. The potential exists for persons to use self-therapies as a 
replacement for prescribed medical treatments. Further, the possibility of 
side-effects if some alternative chemical therapies are used with prescribed 
drug regimes makes the use of self-prescribed treatment approaches an 
important issue to clinical practitioners. Presently, there is a paucity of 
research that examines the use of self-prescribed treatment approaches by 
women infected with HIV. If women with HIV are to be provided quality health 
care, it will be necessary to determine the prevalence and the type of 
self-prescribed therapies being used within this group in order to coordinate 
these activities with conventional medical care. The purpose of this study is 
to explore the use of self-prescribed therapies by women diagnosed as having 
HIV infection. To capture the broadest possible range of self-prescribed 
therapies, self-therapy was defined as any self initiated practice identified 
by the women as a means of promoting or maintaining their health. Such 
therapies could be used either in conjunction with or as a replacement for 
prescribed medical treatment.

Method - This study used a focus group methodology. Twenty-nine women with HIV 
infection participated in one of 4 focus groups conducted to obtain 
descriptions of participants' health care behaviors. The focus groups were 
held in 4 HIV service organizations located in the southeastern U.S. from May 
to August 1993. Two of the sites were in predominately rural areas, one site 
was in a metropolitan area and one site in a medium sized city. Women 
participating in the focus groups represented a wide range of severity of 
illness from asymptomatic HIV infection to full-blown AIDS. The groups ranged 
in size from four to ten participants. Content analysis was used to analyze 
and interpret the data. Individual pieces of information were categorized and 
coded independently by two members of the research team.

Sample Characteristics - Twenty-one of the participants were African-American, 
five were Caucasian and one participant did not indicate a race. The 
participants ranged in age from 27 to 63 years, with a mean age of 36.5 years. 
Five (17%) of the women had completed some college, 13 (45%) had completed 
high school and 11 (38%) had less than a high school education. Only 3 of the 
participants were currently married. Twenty of the women had children, with 
the number of children ranging from 1 to 7 years.

Findings - Focus group sessions generated 101 descriptions or comments 
concerning the use of self-prescribed therapies to promote or maintain health. 
Participants' comments were analyzed and divided into 9 distinct categories. 
Presented in descending frequency of mention: Vitamins, Minerals and Herbs; 
Decisions Not to Use Physician Prescribed Therapies; Spiritual Reliance and 
Rituals; Exercise; Maintaining a More Positive Attitude; Diet and Nutrition; 
Self-education; Life Style Changes; and Experimental Drug Therapies. These 
findings are discussed in relationship to the development of effective 
treatment strategies for women with HIV/AIDS.


\\\\\
The Effects of Hysterectomy on Quality of Life

Lee Ogburn-Russell, Mary Pat Lambden, Gail Bellamy, Cheryl Kasberg Preece, 
Sharon Moore, Teri Pepin, Julie Croop, and Gretchen Culbert

PURPOSE: Hysterectomy is one of the most frequently performed surgeries in 
America, with approximately 546,000 performed annually. In this era of 
increasing interest in medical outcomes and cost-containment, outcomes of 
importance to patients such as symptom relief and effects on quality of life 
should be evaluated. The purpose of this study was to examine the quality of 
life, preoperatively and postoperatively, of women undergoing hysterectomy for 
benign conditions.

METHOD: A convenience sample of 250 women undergoing hysterectomies for non-
oncologic reasons completed a three part questionnaire preoperatively and at 
four and eleven months postoperatively. The return rate at 4 months was 82% 
and at 11 months was 78%. The first instrument assessed current health 
information; the second and third were the SF-Depression Scale. Supplemental 
information was abstracted from the subjects' medical records.

SAMPLE: The mean age of the women was 40 and 77% of the women were married or 
living as married. Eighty-one percent of the women were Caucasian, non-
Hispanic; 13% were Black and 4% were Hispanic. The most commonly reported 
gynecological symptom preoperatively was excessive bleeding followed by pelvic 
pain and fibroids.

RESULTS: Overall, women's health status, physically and psychologically, 
improved post-hysterectomy. All scales of the SF-36 reflected statistically 
significant (p<.001) improvement in health status postoperatively at both 4 
and 11 months. Based on the Zung, the women were found to be less depressed 4 
months after surgery compared to before surgery (p<.00001). At 4 months 
postoperatively, 88% of the women answered "strongly agree" or "agree" when 
asked if they felt better. By 11 months, this percentage increased to 93%. The 
women also reported more satisfying relationships postoperatively and less 
difficulties, pain and discomfort during sexual intercourse. Implications and 
recommendations for nursing practice are for increased counseling of women 
considering or awaiting such surgery. Continuing myths regarding hysterectomy, 
specifically, loss of femininity and their sense of value, can be refuted with 
these current research findings.


\\\\\
Developing an Instrument to Measure Affect in Cognitively Impaired (CI) 
Patients

Cornelia K. Beck

Dementia limits people's options for fulfilling the basic psychosocial needs 
of communication, self-esteem, and autonomy. When these needs remain unmet, 
the individual may experience decreased emotional well-being as signaled by 
increased displays of negative affect and decreased displays of positive 
affect. Measuring the emotional well-being of CI persons is a new research 
area, so few instruments are available.

To successfully measure affect, researchers must be able to repeatedly observe 
events. Videotape recordings often re used for this type of research. From a 
previous study of interventions to decrease disruptive behavior, we have over 
700 videotaped interactions between dementia patients and interventionists. 
These videotapes reveal subjects' change in affect over time, but we were 
unable to locate a suitable instrument for use with our data. Drawing on the 
literature and our observations of CI persons, we developed the Observable 
Displays of Affect Scale (ODAS).

We extracted from the literature and available instruments a total of 514 
words and phrases related to display of affect. Through a three-step process, 
we distilled these into a 34 item observational tool that a panel of experts 
evaluated to establish validity. Two trained observers rated five-minute 
segments of 26 randomly-selected baseline and final treatment week 
intervention videotapes to establish inter- and intra-rater reliabilities. The 
ODAS consists of three subscales: facial display, verbal content, and body 
movement/posture. We tested two interventions in the Disruptive Behavior 
Study: a psychosocial activities intervention, an activities of daily living 
intervention, and a combination of the two. In addition, we had a placebo 
group and a control group. We are using the ODAS to measure the effect of the 
project's interventions on displays of affect in our subjects by comparing 
baseline scores to monthly scores over the 12-week intervention period. In 
this presentation, I will describe the process by which we developed this 
instrument, present preliminary analysis of the videotapes, and show samples 
of our videotapes showing affect changes.


\\\\\
Theory-Based Intervention and Affiliated-Individuation in Caregivers of Adults 
with Demenita

Gayle Acton and Earline Westphal Miller

PURPOSE: As a part of a larger study, the purpose of this study was to test 
the effect of a theory-based intervention (nurse-led support groups) on levels 
of affiliated-individuation in caregivers of adults with dementia. 
Affiliated-individuation, a theoretical concept from the nursing theory 
Modeling and Role-Modeling, is defined as the inherent need to be affiliated 
with other people and systems (support) while simultaneously remaining 
independent from these same people and systems (control) and maintaining a 
comfort and confidence in both situations. The support group intervention was 
aimed at increasing the caregivers' affiliation with other people and systems 
while simultaneously facilitating the development of resources so the 
caregivers might be able to experience a sense of control over his or her 
caregiving situation.

SAMPLE: The sample consisted of 26 caregivers of adults with dementia.

METHODS: Caregivers attended bi-weekly support groups led by nurses. Data were 
collected pre-intervention (Baseline) and at 6 (Time 1) and 12 (Time 2) months 
post baseline. Safety/security and love/belonging subscales of the Basic Needs 
Satisfaction Index (BNSI) were used to measure affiliation. The subscales of 
esteem/self-esteem and self-actualization of the BNSI were used to measure 
individuation. Data were analyzed via MANOVA to assess within subjects 
variance across time.

FINDINGS: Mean scores for affiliation: Baseline=30.48; Time 1=31.14; Time 2= 
31.79. Mean scores for individuation: Baseline=30.68; Time 1=33.38; Time 2= 
32.24. No significant differences in within subjects variances were found.

SECONDARY FINDINGS: Twelve of the caregivers were interviewed at Time 2 and 
asked, "Overall, what has it been like for you to participate in the support 
groups?". Caregivers said the support groups helped them develop connecting 
relationships with others and described the concepts of acceptance, trust, 
sharing, and safety. Caregivers also stated that the ability to connect with 
themselves was facilitated describing internal strengths, accomplishments, 
decision-making skills, self-worth, and accepting self as essential concepts. 
These data suggest a process that parallels the theoretical and operational 
definition of affiliated-individuation indicating that it may have played an 
important role in their ability to contend with the stress of caregiving. 
Therefore, it is logical to suspect that affiliated-individuation was not 
fully captured via the quantitative measures. The secondary findings will be 
presented to demonstrate the value of collecting and comparing both 
quantitative and qualitative data.


\\\\\
Alzheimer's Disease: A Continuum of Care Model

Lore K. Wright, Susan deAndrade, Linda D. Chance, and Royce R. Sampson

Problem: Family members who care for demented, agitated elders in their homes 
often experience high levels of stress and depression. In many cases, nursing 
home placement is seen as the only solution to this difficult problem.

Intervention: The continuum of care model is designed to 1) stabilize 
agitation in demented elders in a special geriatric behavioral intensive care 
unit (average length oi stay 8 days), and 2) provide in-home nursing 
interventions following the elder's discharge from the unit. The interventions 
are conducted over a period of one year; they include caregiver education, 
supportive counseling, and mobilization of appropriate community resources. 
The goal is to improve caregivers' well-being and prevent or delay the elders' 
institutionalization.

Design: Families are randomly assigned to either a home intervention or 
phone-calls only (control) group. Initial caregiver assessments are conducted 
by master degree clinical nurse specialists during the demented elder's 
admission to the unit. Family contacts are made within 24 hours post 
discharge, and interventions/phone calls are conducted within one, two, three, 
six, and 12 months post discharge. Outcome measures include the elders' 
agitation, functioning, and number of months before institutionalization, and 
caregivers' stress, depression, physical health, social support, and 
satisfaction with the program.

Findings: Many caregivers who seek help from this program are truly "at the 
end of their rope". Case profile analyses indicate that a large proportion of 
caregivers have very high levels of stress and depression (levels which would, 
under different circumstances, lead to the caregiver's hospitalization). They 
also have poor physical health, and often a resolve to institutionalize the 
elder regardless of the stabilizing effect achieved in the behavioral 
intensive care unit. In these situations, in-home nursing intervention were 
not effective. Elders were institutionalized within two weeks post discharge. 
However, caregivers who were less severely stressed, depressed, and in better 
physical health did benefit from the intervention. Their stress declined, 
their physical and emotional health was maintained, and the demented elders' 
agitation decreased over time to a tolerable level, and they remained at home. 
Control group caregivers, on the other hand, increased in stress and 
depression, and health declined from fair to poor. Demented elders in the 
control group continued to increase in agitation over time, and several were 
readmitted to the unit.

Conclusion: In-home nursing interventions are effective if caregivers seek 
help before their own emotional and physical strengths have been exhausted. 
Increased community education is essential.


\\\\\
Neonatal Intensive Care: Parents' Perceptions and Perspectives

Deborah A. Raines

Understanding the values and perceptions of parents of Low-birthweight infants 
receiving Neonatal Intensive Care (NIC) can help health care professionals to 
appreciate the needs of facilities and to provide holistic care. The specific 
foci of this research were on developing a understanding of: involvement and 
decision making, perceptions of the NIC process and outcome, and desirable 
care-giver attributes, from the perspective of the parent. The theoretical 
framework guiding this research was Rokeach' s (1973) Nature of Human Values 
and Values Systems. This theory is grounded in the perspective that values are 
motivators of behavior and choices. The significance an individual places on a 
value determines its importance and serves as a criterion to rationalize the 
rightness or wrongness of a choice, action or behavior.

Using a qualitative, exploratory design, data were generated from parent's (n= 
17) of infants admitted to the neonatal unit with a primary presenting problem 
of low-birthweight. This study was limited to parents of infants who had been 
receiving NIC for a minimum of three days, and had no evidence of 
genetic/chromosomal disorders or congenital anomalies requiring surgical 
intervention for correction or palliation at the time of birth. Data were 
collected until emerging categories were elaborated and saturation was 
achieved. The form of data collection was audiotaped interviews that were 
subsequently transcribed into written transcripts for analysis. Interviews 
were conducted using a structured interview guide to assure that all areas of 
interest were explored. Data analysis consisted of decontextualization ad 
recontextualization to identify events, occurrences, or behaviors and to 
establish similarities, relationships, and connections, resulting in the 
emergence of themes.

Four major themes emerged from the data: Being Involved, Technology for 
Survival, A Human Factor, and Caring-Giver Attributes. The theme being 
involved encompassed knowing about the infant's medical status and treatment 
plan, and participating in the infants care during hospitalization. 
Participants acknowledged a lack of knowledge of the medical needs of the 
infant, and expressed a trust in health care providers, yet wanted to develop 
understanding of the infant's needs. A change in perception of NIC, 
experienced by the participants is evident in the themes related to technology 
and human factors. Initially parents' impressions and expectations of NIC were 
focused on the equipment and the belief that technology would fix everything. 
However, over time, parents recognized the essential participation of the 
staff and the powerful nature of the human factor in the management of the 
technology. This human technology interaction was evident in the attributes 
identified as desirable in care givers: competence and caring were given the 
highest priority with communication skill and patience on a secondary level.


\\\\\
Promoting Competence in Parents of Newborns

Mary Jane Hamilton

Due to societal trends such as smaller families,  geographic mobility, and 
lack of extended families, knowledge and expertise needed by many new parents 
in providing care for a newborn may be less than adequate. Inadequate 
parenting may lead to poor developmental outcomes for the child and ultimately 
for society.

Considerable research has demonstrated important links between qualities of 
caregiver-child interactions and child development outcomes. Researchers have 
established strong relationships between specific elements of early 
caregiver-child interactions and later skills or qualities in the child. Based 
on parental-infant assessment, nursing interventions assisting parents to 
improve the quality of early caregiver-child interactions may greatly enhance 
physical, psycho-social growth and development of the infant.

The purpose of this study was to ascertain the effects of a structured nursing 
intervention in increasing both maternal and paternal observed and perceived 
parental competence. Barnard's Child Health Assessment Interaction Model 
served as the conceptual framework for the study. The sample consisted of 
forty-nine expectant parental dyads who were randomly assigned to either the 
experimental or control group. Subjects' caregiver-child interactions were 
rated using the Nursing Child Assessment Feeding Scale and the 
Gibaud-Wallston's Parenting Sense of Competence Scale at preintervention and 
postintervention.

The structured intervention consisted of an explanation, demonstration, and 
return demonstration of the Infant Behavioral Assessment Record between the 
nurse and subjects. The intervention which included a demonstration of the 
infants' behavioral cues and parental responses lasted approximately 20 
minutes. Findings showed that mothers receiving the intervention were more 
verbally and physically responsive to their infants than mothers who did not 
receive the intervention. Fathers, who received the intervention, had 
significant mean increases in their measures of perceived parental competence, 
suggesting that with explanation and demonstration of infant behaviors, men 
may feel more confident in their parenting roles and increase their 
perceptions of themselves as parents.

While the majority of previous research has focused upon the mother-child 
interaction, this study focuses on the family as a reciprocal unit. With early 
discharge, inconsistent followup and teaching newborn care behaviors, the 
nurse has a pivotal role in the adjustment of the new family. A cost 
effective, timely intervention to increase maternal and paternal competence is 
critical for adjustment of new families. Replication of this research and 
implementation of the intervention with a larger, more culturally diverse 
population are recommended.


\\\\\
The Relationship Between Tranepidermal Water Loss and Humidity in Very Low 
Birth Weight Infants

Heidi V. Krowchuk, Ruth F. Hoffman, and Penny G. Blake

Water losses through the skin affect the thermal regulation and the fluid and 
electrolyte balance of very low birth weight (VLBW) infants. Disturbances of 
heat and water balance are pronounced in VLBW infants due to the increased 
permeability of their immature skin. Ambient humidity of the environment may 
be one factor contributing to TEWL; in studies with full-term infants, TEWL 
was negatively correlated with humidity measurements. The purpose of this 
study was to examine the relationship between transepidermal water loss (TEWL) 
and relative ambient humidity of the environment of VLBW infants during the 
first 9 days of life. A correlational design was used to examine this 
relationship, and the study was approved by the appropriate Institutional 
Review Boards prior to its conduct. After written consent was obtained from 
the parents, 43 VLBW infants admitted consecutively to the Level RI Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit over a six month period and who fulfilled the study 
criteria were enrolled. The sample consisted of 30 female and 13 male VLBW 
infants with a mean gestational age of 25.7 weeks (SD = 1.7) and a mean birth 
weight of 858.2 grams (SD = 200.3). All infants were enrolled in the study 
within 32 hours of birth (M = 16.8, SD = 6.0), and all infants were cared for 
in double-walled isolettes during the duration of the study. TEWL measurements 
were obtained from the subjects' abdominal skin, and ambient humidity 
measurements were obtained from inside subjects' isolettes (after a 10 minute 
period of equilibration) on 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 days of life using an 
Evaporimeter (ServoMed, Stockholm), which is a valid and reliable instrument 
for determimng TEWL and ambient humidity. The Evaporimeter measures water 
evaporation from the skin within the range of 0 - 300g/m2h (grams per meter 
squared per hour), and relative humidity within the range of 0 - 100%. TEWL 
measurements over the nine days reflected maturation of the subjects' skin and 
ranged from 4 - 108g/m2h; measurements obtained on day 1 were the highest (M = 
43.5, SD = 25.0), and the measurements on day 9 were the lowest (M = 15.6, SD 
= 5.4). Ambient humidity of the environment of the VLBW ranged from 22% to 
86%; however, mean humidity measurements ranged from 35.8% (SD = 8.3) to 42.8% 
(SD = 17.5). The relationships between TEWL measurements and ambient humidity 
measurements from the 5 data collection points (days 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9) were 
calculated using the Pearson Correlation Coefficient. The tests revealed no 
statistically significant relationships. Further analyses revealed a 
statistically significant negative correlation between TEWL and the variables 
of gestational age (r = -0.53, p <.0001) and birth weight (r = -0.55, p 
<.0001). The results of this study demonstrate that ambient humidity was not 
related to TEWL in the VLBW infants in the sample; that is, TEWL was not 
increased by lower humidity levels. This has important practice implications, 
since ideal isolette humidity levels for VLBW infants have been thought to be 
about 50-70%. Further study needs to be done to determine if manipulating the 
ambient humidity effects the TEWL of VLBW infants.


\\\\\
Standardized Rest Periods for Preterms: Apnea and Weight Gain Effects

Daine Holditch-Davis, Carol Torres, Ann O'Hale, and Betty Tucker

The stimulation provided by the intermediate care unit is known to be 
inappropriate for the development of sleeping and waking in preterm infants. 
Modifying multiple aspects of this environment has been shown to reduce the 
length of stay of infants probably by reducing the incidence of apnea and/or 
by improving the rate of weight gain. The purpose of this study was to 
determine the effect of modifying a single aspect of the intermediate care 
environment on the incidence of apnea and weight gain in convalescent preterm 
infants. Previous analysis of this intervention had showed that it affected 
the sleeping and waking patterns of infants, resulting longer undisturbed 
sleep periods.

Twenty-two preterm infants from an intermediate care nursery (ICN) were 
assigned to experimental and control groups using a randomized, matched pair 
design. Experimental infants had a mean gestational age of 27.6 weeks and 
birth weight of 899 gm; control infants a mean gestational age of 28.0 weeks 
and birthweight of 896 gm. Over a 3 week period, experimental infants were 
provided a 1 1/2-hour nap period 4 times a day during which their beds were 
covered and they were left undisturbed. One nap each was on the day and 
evening shifts, and two on the night shift to provide day-night 
differentiation. Control infants received standard nursing care. Apnea and 
weight were recorded daily from the medical records.

Although the experimental infants had more apnea at the start of the study 
than the control infants (1.3 episodes/day versus 0.4), the average daily 
amount of apnea over the 3 weeks of the study did not differ between the 
groups (t(20) = 1.15). However, when the change over tune in the amount of 
apnea was compared, the experimental infants showed a significantly more rapid 
decline in the incidence of apnea, as determined by comparing the slopes of 
the regression of apnea over age (t(38) = 2.77, p < .01). In addition, an 
analysis of covariance using weight on entry into the study as a covariate, 
showed that the experimental infants gained significantly more weight per day 
than the control infants (21.2 g vs. 16.0 g, (F(1,19) = 4.84, p < .05) so that 
by the end of the 3 weeks the experimental infants weighted an average of 1600 
g and the control infants 1419 g.

Thus, a simple modification of nursing care that involved minimal increases in 
nursing time had an impact not only on the sleeping and waking of preterm 
infants but also on the incidence of apnea and rate of weight gain. All of 
these effects would lead to a shortened length of hospitization for the 
experimental infants. Since a simple modification of nursing care had 
relatively large effects, practicing nurses need to carefully evaluate nursing 
care to deteremine whether all aspects are needed and effective.


\\\\\
Being in Relation to Others: Social Support and Long Term Survivors of AIDS

Julie Barroso

On concern to nurses who care for people with HIV desase is how to assist them 
to best utilize social support available to them. In an illness unparalleled 
by the stigma suffered by those infected, social support is a crucial 
dimension in supporting them to find a level of health within the context of 
their illness. This paper presents data on social support and long term 
survivors of AIDS. It is part of a larger study on the phenomenon of becoming 
a long term survivor of AIDS.

A naturalistic study design using multiple intensive ethnographic interviews 
was employed to elicit data from 14 men and 6 women who were long term 
survivors of AIDS. Theortecial and purposive sampling techniques were used to 
elicit participants in the Tampa Bay area. Criteria for selection included 
being at least 18 years old and English speaking; being in Stage IV of HIV 
disease for at least 3 years; and self-definition as a long term survivor. 
Data were generated through multiple intensive open-ended interviews, 
demographic information sheets, and self-reporting of T4 cell counts. Data 
were analyzed using manifest and latent content analysis techniques and the 
method of constant comparison.

One of the dimensions that emerged from the data was one titled "being in 
relation to others." This was the interpersonal dimension of becoming a long 
term survivor of AIDS, and was defined as a complex set of interpersonal 
relationships that had been renegotiated due to the stigma of AIDS and its 
modes of transmission; many of the participants found themselves rejected by 
family and friends. Participants realized they ahd to establish new 
relationships and renegotiate old relationships in order to survive with AIDS. 
Specific ways of being in relation to others included dealing with one's 
family, renegotiating their friendship group, helping others with HIV, and 
developing a relationship with a higher power.

The traditional concept of social support ususally involves the provision of 
direct assistance or emotional support. The results of this study offer a more 
complex view of social support which includes the renegotiation of roles, 
dealing with the stigma of a disease, and reassemmbling the support network. 
It also addresses the idea of a relationship with a higher power as a form of 
social support.

The results of this study have implications for counseling people with HIV 
disease, and for nursing actions to enhance social support in this vulnerable 
group.


\\\\\
Perceptions of Nutritional Beliefs and Behaviors of Persons with HIV/AIDS

Priscilla W. Koester

The purpose of this study was to identify and describe nutritional beliefs and 
behaviors of persons living with HIV/AIDS (PLWH/A). While nutrition and 
dietary control are influential variables in coping with several acute and 
chronic diseases, the nutritional beliefs and practices of PLWH/A are 
underrepresented in the research literature. Therefore a grounded theory 
approach was used to answer the following research questions: 1) What are the 
beliefs and behaviors related to nutrition held by persons with HIV/AIDS? 2) 
How do persons with HIV/AIDS determine when and with what to supplement their 
nutritional intake? 3) What sources and types of information enter into 
nutritional decisions by persons with HIV/AIDS?

Purposeful sampling was employed to identify 28 HIV+ participants who utilized 
the services of a hospital-based Special Diseae Unit in a large southwestern 
city. Two audiotaped interviews were conducted with each of the participants 
across home and hospital settings.

Transcribed interview data were analyzed using content analysis and constant 
comparison. Findings revealed an emergent framework. Taking charge, that 
PLWH/A used to manage their nutritional intake. The strategies described 
within Taking Charge are: Continuing, Exploring, Experimenting, and 
Committing. As PLWH/A moved from Continuing to Committing, they assumed 
increasing responsibility for their nutritional intake. Wasting and other 
changes in health status prompted PLWH/A to explore and experiment with new 
foods, different preparation methods and supplements. PLWH/A who perceived 
that their chosen foods and supplements were beneficial, committed to regular 
use. Their selection of specific foods was highly individualized and dependent 
upon available information. Also in the findings nurses were not considered as 
resources for nutritional information.

The results of this study imply that nurses should identify the nutritional 
strategy used by their patients and aim their care to support that strategy. A 
collaborative model, utilizing the skills of PLWH/A, nurses, and dietitians, 
should be developed to provide nutritional support for the strategies that 
PLWH/A use.


\\\\\
Stressors, Resources, Burden, and Family Functioning of Family members who are 
a Primary Support to an HIV Infected Woman

Alice Demi, Richard Sowell, and Linda Moneyham

Background: Hiv infection is known to raise many issues and concerns in 
infected persons and in family members. To date, most research on the ipact of 
HIV on families has focused on the families of gay men. The demographic 
characteristics and social environment of HIV infected women and their 
families differ dramatically from that of gay men. The majority of HIV 
infected women are people of color, lower economic status, less educated, and 
reside in diverse urban and non-urban locales, thus what is known about gay 
men's families may not be relevant to HIV infected women's families.

Specific aims: The purpose of this study was twofold: first, to describe the 
characteristics of family members' who were identified as being a primary 
support to an HIV infected woman and; second, to assess the relationships 
among family members stressors, resources, burden, and family functioning.

Research questions: Who are the people that are identified as providing 
primary support to HIV infected women? What are the best predictors of family 
members' burden? What are the best predictors of amily members' family 
functioning?

Hypotheses: 1) HIV infected women's health status and need for help will be 
positively related to family members' burden. 2) Social support and resources, 
will be positively related to family members' family functioning.

Sample: The 151 HIV infected women matched with 151 family members (who were 
identified by the women as a primary support person and were knowledgeable of 
the woman's HIV status) were recruited from 8 AIDS/HIV public health treatment 
sites in a southeastern state.

Instruments: FACES was used to assess family functioning; Burden was assessed 
with a revised version of the Zarit Burden scale; and social support and 
resources were measured with scales developed by Dunst and his colleagues.

Data analysis: Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, correlations 
and multiple regression. Internal consistency reliability was computed for all 
scales for which it was appropriate.

Findings: The women ranged in age from 16 to 58, while the family members 
ranged in age from 16-71; the majority in both groups were African-American 
(80% and 82% respectively). The family members tended to be female (59%) and 
the majority knew the woman for more than 6 years (44%), while only 41% lived 
in the same household with the woman. The best predictors of Burden and family 
functioning were identified through multiple regression.
Implications: Findings from this sutdy may be useful in helping develop 
programs to meet the needs of family members who are providing care to HIV 
infected women.


\\\\\
Metaphors and Community-Based Care of People with HIV Infection and 
Significant Others

Gail M. Powell-Cope

As care for people with HIV infection becomes increasingly community-based 
health care providers must pay attention to how people use these services in 
order to design and implement programs with clients' perspectives in mind. One 
way to learn about clients' perspectives is to elicit the metaphors (that is, 
the names people give to things that belong to other things) they use. 
Understanding these metaphors will help health care providers to design more 
effective and humane services. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to 
discuss common metaphors people with HIV and their significant others use to 
describe community-based HIV health and social services.

Participatory research methods were used. The sample consisted of 20 adults 
with HIV infection, at all phases of teh illness, and the designated 
significant other. Using an open-ended , semi-structured format, in depth 
interviews were completed. Participants were asked to describe their 
experiences in obtaining and retaining community-based HIV services. 
Interviews were transcribed, coded and analyzed using constant comparative 
analysis. Reliability and validity were addressed consistent with qualitative 
methods.

The metaphors people used to describe the community-based health care system 
provided a means for expressing self identities and for describing their 
relationships with health care providers. Furthermore, each metaphor 
represented a distinct type of power relationship with community-based 
organizations and the people who work in those organizations. Common metaphors 
used to describe community-based care were a: maze, battle, and game. The maze 
metaphor was used by people who were novices in using the care system. They 
perceived services as mysterious and confusing and tended to use services 
through a trial-and-error method. People who used the battle metaphor were 
often people in transition from novices to seasoned users of community 
services. Those engaged in battle were beginning to learn how to be self-
advocates, but let anger drive many of their interactions with care systems. 
They tended to view services and service providers as hostile and were 
motivated by the will to survive HIV infection. Those who perceived serves as 
a game were the "wise" because they knew how to makethe system work for 
themselves and for friends. They effectely used the formal and informal care 
systems, applied spoken and unspoken rules of the game, and used assertiveness 
selectively to obtain services.

Recognizing these metaphors is important for health care providers because 
they provide insight into how clients use care systems. Providers can begin, 
then, to work with people from their frame fo references in order to provide 
the most appropriate and humane care. Because metaphors inform health care 
providers how they are perceived by clients, health care providers can use 
metaphors for self-understanding as a basis for interacting with clients and 
for designing effective community-based services.


\\\\\
In-Home and Community Service Use by African-American Elders

Debra C. Wallace, Eva Napier, and Tim Fox

The purpose of this study was to examine in-home and community service use 
among African-American elders (65+) in a southeastern state. African-American 
elders have unique cultural health beliefs and behaviors and are considered a 
vulnerable group with respect to health and well-being (Healthy People 2000). 
This vulnerability may be exacerbated by the proposed budget cuts to the Older 
Americans and Social Security Acts. However, there is little scientific 
evidence on which to validate past and justify future allocations for 
federally mandated care provided by the aging network to this group of elders.

Cox/s Interaction Model of Client Health Behavior was used to guide the study. 
Two research questions were addressed: a) which demographic characteristics, 
social influences, environmental resources, and previous health care 
experiences were deterministic of higher service use among African-American 
elders? and b) which demographic characteristics, social influences, 
environmental resources, and previous health care experiences were predictors 
of use of specific services among African-American elders?

Records of 931 African-American elderly clients of an Area Agency on Aging in 
South Carolina provided sample data. Males and rural elders are represented in 
proportions similar to population statistics; low income elders are 
overrepresented. Multiple linear regression was used to determine 
characteristics of elders likely to use higher numbers of services; multiple 
logistic regression was used to determine elders most likely to use specific 
services.

Arthritis, hypertension, heart disease, and diabetes were the most frequent 
health conditions experienced. These conditions are consistent with national 
causes of death and disability among older persons nationally, as was the rate 
of co-morbidity. Case management, congregate meal, home delivered meal, 
outreach, and commodity distribution were the most frequently used services. 
Age, rural vs. urban residence, number and type of health problem, sensory 
impairment, and instrumental activities of daily living were predictors of 
use; gender, marital status, living arrangement, payment source, and 
activities of daily living were not predictors.

Implications for advanced practice, health policy, resource allocation, health 
care delivery, and case management will be discussed.


\\\\\
Dimensions of Understanding in Cross-Cultural Nurse-Client Realtionships: A 
Qualitative Nursing Study

Margaret Osborne

During the last two decades European immigration to Canada has decreased while 
the number of immigrants from Asia and Latin America has increased (Canadian 
Task Force, 1988). The potential for cross-cultural misunderstanding is 
evident given the differences in the explanatory models of mental health and 
illness between these immigrants and the dominant Canadian culture. 
Consequently, the health needs for this client population may be unmet and 
services not utilized. Even though nursing plays a major role in the provision 
of mental health care where nurse-client encounters are the focus of practice, 
there has been little published research about the cross-cultural 
interactional process.

The purpose of this study was to describe and explore what constitutes 
understanding within the cross-cultural nurse-client relationship, in the 
context of mental health-psychiatric nursing practice. The conceptual 
orientation was based upon the sensitizing concepts of explanatory model 
(KIeinman, 1978) and caring (Watson, 1988, Gadow, 1988, Noddings, 1984).

A naturalistic, descriptive research design, incorporating intensive, semi- 
structured, ethnographic interviews and participant observations was used. 
Nurse-client dyads, from community psychiatric rehabilitation programs 
participated. Thematic analysis was used to induct dimensions of understanding 
in cross-cultural nurse-client encounters. The impact of the nurse's and 
client's explanatory models of mental health and illness on the development of 
understanding, and factors which facilitated or impeded the development of 
understanding were generated.

Study findings suggested that understanding was comprised of five dimensions. 
The dimensions clustered into two groups: core dimensions were behaviors which 
gave entry into and enabled the cultural negotiation of the care process; and 
secondary dimensions were behaviors essential to supporting the facilitation 
of the core dimensions. Core dimensions were managing the language barrier and 
the exploration of explanatory models of mental health and mental illness. 
Essential, supportive dimensions were commitment to a human to human 
relationship, connecting in a culturally sensitive way and taking time.

Three areas of relevance for nursing were: the multi-dimensional, complexity 
of the cross-cultural interactional process; a further contribution to 
nursing's body of knowledge on caring; the usefulness of the explanatory model 
concept in eliciting the influences of personal/professional knowing and the 
enviromnent as factors impacting the development of understanding.


\\\\\
Georgia's Twenties Century Public Health Nurses A Social History of Racial 
Relations

Rose Broeckel Cannon

In Georgia during the early twentieth century Jim Crow "separate but equal" 
mentality sifted like blowing sand into every crevice of society. Life under 
Jim Crow, however, was never equal. This study examines the way in which 
Georgia's twentieth-century Black and white public health nurses responded to 
issues of race in their early personal lives and into their professional 
careers. Differences in racial experiences were noted between those born and 
reared in rural and urban communities, and those who moved in and out of the 
South for military and post-graduate education. The effect of the depression, 
World War II, and the coming of civil rights were specific historical time 
periods that applied to these nurses' experiences with race.

Racial customs were distinctive in each Georgia public health setting 
explored: in the cities of Atlanta, Savannah, and Macon, and in various rural 
areas. The examination of forty-five interviews from The Georgia Nursing 
History Project disclosed differing perceptions of race and racial issues 
among Black and white public health nurses as they discussed their daily 
lives, their work, and their professional organizations. Discriminatory 
policies such as inequality of salaries and educational opportunity, and 
differences in titling, were largely overcome through social action by the 
Black nurses with the support and encouragement they found in their separate 
nursing organizations.

The amount of awareness of inequalities due to race by the White nurses varied 
from denial, to feelings of sympathy, and in some, hope for an end to 
segregation. Changes in the health departments brought about by law in the 
1960s transpired smoothly. There is no indication that the white nurses 
interviewed opposed changes in racial customs in the health departments, but 
none participated in actions of social change with their Black colleagues.

The interviews show the difficulty in overcoming racial attitudes instilled 
from childhood and reinforced by living within a segregated society. These 
attitudes and values are illuminated in the narratives of the nurses who in 
their own voices so willingly shared their experiences to preserve a portion 
of the history of public health nursing in Georgia.


\\\\\
Illness Experiences and Health-Recovery Behaviors of Patients in Southern 
Appalachia

Mary Ann Rosswurm, Debra Dent, Cyndi Armstrong-Persily, Paula Woodburn, and 
Barbara Davis

The impact of culture on health care delivery and health outcomes is often 
given inadequate consideration, particularly in acute care settings. The 
purpose of this exploratory study was to gain a better understanding of the 
influences of Appalachian culture and rural living on patients' illness 
experiences and health recovery behaviors. An adaptation of Cox's Interaction 
Model of Client Health Behavior served as the organizing framework for this 
study. Within this framework, patient/health professional interaction was 
explored by comparing their value systems and their opinions about patient 
participation in decision-making. Relationships of health outcomes with 
patient background variables were also examined.

The study sample consisted of 257 randomly selected adult patients, who were 
admitted to medical-surgical units from eight hospitals in West Virginia, a 
state in the Southern Appalachian Region. The mean age of patients was 57 
years. Patients completed interviews in the hospital and phone interviews two 
weeks after hospital discharge. A subset of 28 native-born Appalachian 
patients from the sample participated in home interviews. In addition, 203 
nurses and 79 physicians completed value rankings and decisional-control 
questions.

Quantitative and qualitative data were triangulated. The data suggested that 
illness and health recovery are affected by culture, age, gender, and rural 
residence. Although there was evidence of cultural change, traditional values 
and roles persisted in this population and influenced health behaviors. 
Patients perceived themselves as being able to cope with illness and 
disability better than preventing illness. They made very few changes to a 
healthier lifestyle post-hospitalization. Cardiovascular and respiratory 
problems were comnon health problems. Patients did not wish to be involved in 
decision-making to the extent nurses would like them to participate. They 
relied on taking medications for health recovery. Patients identified health 
and family as their most important values. Health was perceived as being able 
to carry out everyday activities.

The comprehensive picture of the illness experience and health-recovery 
behaviors described in this study generate ideas for future intervention 
studies for improving health outcomes for various cultural groups and rural 
populations.


\\\\\
The Effects of Bedrest and Activity on Exygen Balance: A Validation Study for 
the Nursing Diagnosis of Activity Intolerance

Diane O. Tyler

Introduction: Bedrest and oxygen supply/demand imbalances are identified as 
key factors associated with poor activity tolerance. Nurses assess tolerance 
to activity and make judgments about progressive activity levels based on the 
individual's responses; however, consensus on the indicators of poor tolerance 
is not well established in the discipline.

Purpose & Design: A descriptive, correlational study with a repeated measures 
design was employed to validate the indicators and contributing factors 
associated with activity tolerance. The specific aims of this study were: (1) 
to describe the physiologic and self-reported responses that occur with the 
initial post-bedrest activity of chair-sitting in a homogeneous sample of 
critically ill patients, (2) to examine the relationships between these 
responses and oxygen supply/demand balance, and (3) to examine the 
relationship between activity responses and length of bedrest.

Methods: The sample consisted of 25 coronary artery bypass graft patients who 
had been on continuous bedrest since surgery. The dependent variables were the 
defining characteristics for the NANDA nursing diagnosis of Activity 
Intolerance (e.g., heart rate and rhythm, systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure, dyspnea, fatigue, weakness, and discomfort); each were measured 
before, during and after the first post-operative chair-sitting activity. Data 
to calculate oxygen consumption, oxygen delivery, and the oxygen extraction 
ratio (e.g., ratio of oxygen consumption to delivery which was the indicator 
of oxygen balance) were also measured at each time period. Descriptive 
statistics and parametric and nonparametric tests of significance were applied 
to the data.
Findings: Small, yet statistically significant, transient changes in 
physiological and perceptual response patterns were seen in most of the 
variables. These responses were consistent with adaptations to orthostatic 
positioning, exertion and sympathetic nervous system stimulation, which are 
well documented in healthy subjects and other cardiac patients. Few clinically 
significant changes were found, with most occurring in the postactivity 
period. Oxygen consumption and extraction increased with activity, and oxygen 
extraction remained significantiy elevated after 10 minutes of supine rest. 
Oxygen delivery was below normal, but remained constant throughout the study. 
Mean time on bedrest was 31 hours. Nonsignificant correlations were found 
between bedrest and oxygen balance and between these factors and NANDA's 
defining characteristics.

Implications: The increase in oxygen consumption in the presence of a low 
oxygen delivery placed the patients at risk for an oxygen supply/demand 
imbalance. The high tissue oxygen extraction and generally small changes seen 
in most parameters indicate that the increased oxygen extraction by the 
tissues was sufficient to maintain homeostasis without necessitating major 
adjustments in other responses. Thus, oxygen extraction, the measure of oxygen 
balance in this study, is seen as a contributing factor for activity 
tolerance. The short duration of bedrest accounted for little variance in the 
responses to activity and was not identified as a significant factor in the 
patients' tolerance. Intersubject variability in response patterns was seen 
and clinically significant changes were found even during postactivity rest, 
indicating patients require evaluation before, during and after activity to 
assess for tolerance. The findings document normal and abnormal patterns of 
adaptation to the stress of activity after bedrest in patients at risk for 
poor tolerance. They also serve to validate the etiological nature of activity 
tolerance and to an empirical basis for prescribing and monitoring activity 
following acute illness.


\\\\\
Cardiovascular Reactivity During Cognitive Stress in Women Before and After 
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafts

Judith McFetridge

Data from recent studies have identified female gender as a risk factor for 
operative mortality during coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and for 
prolonged hospital stay afterwards. Although there is evidence that 
cardiovascular reactivity in men with ischemic heart disease (IHD) may be 
associated with an increase in afterload, data are not available to explain 
the mechanisms associated with cardiovascular reactivity in women. The purpose 
of this study was to describe cardiovascular reactivity during cognitive 
stress in women with IHD before and after myocardial reperfusion. The 
following hypotheses were tested: (a) heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure 
(SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and mean arterial pressure (MAP) will 
increase significantly from baseline during cognitive stress; (b) stroke 
volume (SV), cardiac output (CO) and myocardial contractility (MC) will not 
change significantly from baseline during cognitive stress before CABG but 
will increase significantly from baseline during cognitive stress following 
CABG; and (c) total peripheral resistance (TPR) will not change significantly 
from baseline during cognitive stress prior to CABG, but will decrease 
significantly from baseline during cognitive stress following CABG.

The study was quasi-experimental with a test-retest design. The independent 
variable was cognitive stress and the Stroop Color Word Test (SCWT) was used 
to induce cognitive stress. The dependent variable was cardiovascular 
reactivity and the empirical indicators were HR, SV, CO, MC, SBP, DBP, MAP, 
and TPR. The Minnesota Impedance Cardiograph (model 304b) and the Marshall 95 
sphygmomanometer were used to measure these variables before, during, and 
after the administration of the SCWT. Forty-two women participated in the 
study, 21 with IHD and 21 healthy controls. Forty-one subjects were Caucasian, 
one was African American and the mean age was 66.6 years. Subjects in the IHD 
group were tested one day prior to CABG and three or five days following CABG, 
and subjects in the control group were tested on two occasions, one week 
apart. Multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance was used to test 
the hypothesis of no change in cardiovascular reactivity during cognitive 
stress within subject, between subjects, and 
within-subject-by-between-subjects interaction. The significance level was set 
at 0.05.

The results of the analysis supported the hypotheses. Heart rate, CO and MAP 
increased significantly from resting baseline during the SCWT before and after 
CABG (P<0.05). Stroke volume and myocardial contractility did not change 
significantly from resting baseline during the SCWT before CABG (p>0.05), but 
increased significantly from resting baseline following CABG (p<0.05). Total 
peripheral resistance did not change significantly from resting baseline 
during the SCWT prior to CABG (p>0.05), but decreased significantly from 
resting baseline during the SCWT following CABG (p<0.05). The findings in the 
control group were comparable to those documented in the IHD group following 
CABG. These findings suggest that afterload may increase during cognitive 
stress in women with IHD prior to myocardial reperfusion. An increase in 
afterload in the presence of compromised coronary blood flow places the woman 
with IHD at risk for myocardial ischemia.


\\\\\
Symptoms and Characteristcs of Women Experiencing a Myocardial Infarction

Jean C. McSweeney

Purpose of Study: Coronary heart disease (CHD) is now the leading cause of 
death and disability in women. Associated costs of cardiovascular disease in 
women are expected to surpass $128 billion in 1995. These costs continue to 
soar as the life span of women increases. However researchers have 
traditionally studied CHD and specifically myocardial infarction (MI) as 
diseases of men and ignored the effect of the disease on women. Little is 
known about what symptoms women exhibit surrounding a MI and what 
characteristics women have in common who experience a MI. The purpose of this 
study was to explore these issues.

Research Question: What symptoms are reported by women surrounding their 
myocardial infarction? Questions related to common characteristics emerged 
from commonalties identified during initial interviews.

Theoretical Orientation and Methods: Kleinman's concept of explanatory models, 
common sense understandings of an illness expenence, was used to elicit 
illness narratives surrounding the MI experience. A descriptive and naturistic 
field study design using indepth interviews was employed purposive 
nonprobability sampling was utilized to select 20 ethnically and 
socioeconomically diverse women between the ages of 34-77 who had experienced 
their first known MI within the previous 6-24 months. Education ranged from 
less than eight years to masters preparation.

Data Generation and Analysis: Data were generated by intensive indepth 
interviews which followed a semi-structured format and focused on the symptoms 
women reported prior to being diagnosed with a MI. Interviews were tape 
recorded, transcribed verbatim, entered into Ethnograph computer program, and 
analyzed by the techniques of content analysis and constant compartson.

Findings and Implications: All women who experienced a MI under the age of 60 
were working full time. Ninety-five percent had experienced menopause or had 
hysterectomies (60%) but only 2 were on estrogen replacement therapy (ERT). No 
subjects had discussed the cardiac benefits of ERT with a health professional. 
Five were taking vitamins and 4 were taking antioxidants up to one year prior 
to the MJ. Symptoms reported included severe faugue up to 1 week prior to MI 
(75%), pain in the back under the shoulder blades (35%), pain radiating to the 
right arm (10%), both arms (20%) and localIzed chest pain (15%). Thirty-flve 
percent reported no to mild pain while 10% reported crushing pain. Chest pain 
typically occurred as a late symptom. Another common complaint was tingling 
and/or heaviness in the arms while two women experienced migraine headaches 
for the first time prior to the MI. Since women experienced atypical symptoms 
such as mild discomfort, fatigue and back pain, over 50% delayed seeking 
treatment for 24 hours. Seven reported delayed diagnoses of MI after entering 
the health care system. Of this group, one was sent home while 3 infarcted 1-3 
days later while being treated for stress. More research is needed to document 
symptoms and characteristics of women who have experienced a MI so that 
commonly occurring symptoms may be identified and taught to women, nurses, and 
physicians. This should result in more timely reporting of symptoms, earlier 
treatment, less disability and thus decreased costs associated with MI in 
women.


\\\\\
Mortality Probability Model in Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction

Doris J Rosenow

Specific Aims: Among the elderly, cardiovascular disease now ranks as the 
leading cause of disability and death. Patients who suffer an acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI) are a very heterogeneous group whose prognosis after an AMI 
differs widely. Studies have shown that approxiinately 10% to 29% of 
hospitalized patients after AMI will not live to be discharged. Therefore, the 
specific aims of this study were to: (1) determine factors predictive of 
hospital mortality in patients with AMI; and (2) examine the usefulness of 
three severity of illness indices.

Research Question: What are the predictive factors of hospital mortality in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction?

Methodology: Data was collected by a retrospective chart review. A pilot study 
of 110 charts of men and women diagnosed with AMI who had expired in a 
Southwestern University Medical were reviewed. The three severity of illness 
indices that were used for data collection were: (1) Funk & Pooley-Richards 
(1994) Coronary Prognostic Indices which included five variables [history of 
AMI, older age, lower LVEF, and a higher number of occluded coronary vessels]; 
(2) Dubois, Pierard, Albert, et al., (1988) Prognostic Index which included 
three subgroups of patients [high risk, intermediate risk, and good 
prognosis]; and (3) Gustafson, Fryback, Rose, et al., (1986) Ischemic Heart 
Disease Index (IHDI) which included 10 categones; time from onset of symptoms, 
duration of pain, age, previous heart disease, preexisting second organ 
disease, family and social history, electrical instability, amount of 
myocardial damage, presence of acute MI, and electrical complications.

Data Analysis: A logistic regression analysis will be used to determine the 
results of the study. At present, the data analysis is not completed. 
Therefore, the findings will be presented at the conference, which will 
include a mortality probability model for patients at high risk for mortality 
after an AMI.

Implications: Clinical assessment of those patients for high risk mortality 
after an AMI should lead to closer monitoring, selective and more focused 
intervention regimes which would provide more timely management decisions.


\\\\\
Administrative Support for a Program of Research

Barbara Farley

In the early 90's, MCVH was a 1000 bed university affiliated health care 
facility with a strong interest in nursing research. However, the 
organizational culture necessary to build a program of research was missing. 
Therefore, creating the appropriate culture and building the organizational 
structure necessary to meet the research mission was identified as a priority.

Building the infrastructure started with enhancing professional nursing 
practice and clarifying expectations. Collaboration with colleagues from the 
School of Nursing provided the initial guidance and support for many of these 
efforts. The development of a Professional Practice Model and the 
implementation of a clinical ladder provided opportunities to include research 
expectations into nursing practice. Job descriptions were rewritten to include 
research at all levels, from novice to expert.

These efforts resulted in the development of a Director of Nursing Research 
position. Although funding was not obtained in the first budget cycle, 
persistence eventually was successful. Negotiations with the School of Nursing 
resulted in a jointly funded position. An important aspect was the excitement 
generated which generated support from all nursing levels.

However, the nurse executive's role in this setting was not only to advocate 
within the nursing department, but also to educate administrative colleagues, 
many of whom who had not been exposed to the benefits of nursing research. 
Emphasizing the importance of research to quality of care helped sustain 
support at all levels.

One of the aspects of my job which I enjoy most, is to reward all scholarly 
efforts, great and small, in as many ways and forums as possible. As of this 
writing, 60 nursing research studies are underway and 5 funded grants have 
been obtained. Other accomplishments for the 1994-1995 year included: 12 peer-
reviewed publications, 17 national peer-reviewed presentations and 36 
peer-reviewed poster sessions. Nursing research is off to a good start in this 
setting!


\\\\\
Creating a Climate for Scholarship Through Education and Professional 
Development

Lauren R. Goodloe

Creating a climate that promoted scholarship within nursing services involved 
a multifaceted approach. Key to the creation of such a climate was an emphasis 
on the continuing education and development of nurses. Five years ago, nursing 
leadership concentrated on the professional development of nurses at the 
Medical College of Virginia Hospitals (MCVH) in order to create a 
patient/family focused environment which was known for research based, expert 
level nursing care.

The foundation was created using several strategies: 1) leadership, support, 
clear expectations and a vision from the Nurse Executive; 2) development of a 
values statement for nursing practice that clearly focused on 
patients/families as well as the expectations of nursing practice and 
professional development; 3) implementation of a model of practice (Primary 
Nursing) that supported the values; and 4) a Professional Advancement Program 
that recognized and rewarded clinical practice, research and professional 
development. The development, implementation, and outcomes of each of these 
will be discussed.

Although nurses at MCVH were always encouraged to attend conferences, present 
papers and posters, and write for publication; nursing research efforts were 
weak. In order to build a strong research component into clinical nursing 
practice, an expert was needed to guide the process. A position was created 
for a Director of Nursing Research to focus on developing a research climate 
within nursing services through education, consultation and coaching.

There are a number of other ways in which MCVH supports the professional 
development of nurses and encourages the creation of a scholarly practice 
environment. In a time when many hospitals are elminating Education and 
Development departments, MCVH has made a conscious effort to support a 
department such as this to ensure that professional development, education and 
research continue for our employees. The focus of this department and other 
support programs will be discussed.


\\\\\
Developing and Implementing a Research Agenda

Eileen F. Morrison

Many clinical researchers have emphasized the CNS role in the conduction of 
research as a way to fulfill a hospital's research mission. However, because 
of a variety of social and economic conditions in service and academia, 
clinical researchers must reconsider their mission. It is suggested here that 
the research mission must have a direct impact on patient care and prioritize 
the involvement of staff nurses in the process of research utilization as well 
as involve the CNS. This paper provides one example of how a clinical 
researcher is developing a research mission which emphasized research 
utilization to improve patient care, as well as research conduction.

After an initial assessment phase, two primary issues arose as important in 
attaining these goals; helping the staff nurse to feel more comfortable with 
research utilization and helping those already doing research to improve the 
quality and publishability of their research efforts. Three primary activities 
were used to accomplish these goals: (a) the formation of a research committee 
with a predominant staff nurse perspective, (b) an educational program for 
staff nurses which focused on the critique of research and (c) improving 
research skills through individual and group consulting. Many additional 
strategies were implemented however, to address the need for continued culture 
change, developing credibility for nursing research and improving trust and 
communication.

For example, job descriptions were rewritten to include a clear statement of 
research utilization competencies at all clinical ladder levels. Research 
related policies and procedures were revised and rewritten. A position was 
created for a research assistant, to work 1:1 with nurses on issues such as 
library searches, developing coding dictionaries, managing data and data 
analysis. A yearly research award of $1000 was established by nursing 
administration to encourage research focused on our care priorities.

The position is now clearly established and a core group of nurses educated in 
the basics of research. The primary challenge now is to ensure that practicing 
nurses apply their knowledge to improve care. This will be accomplished 
through several mechanisms, i.e., formal and informal education and activities 
by the research committee, the quality improvement council and the practice 
council. Several of these strategies will be reviewed.


Focusing of Quality Patient Care: Contributions From Research

Deborah S. Mobley

Until recently continuous improvement and research have been seen as mutually 
exclusive. Now in the era of rightsizing, reorganization and reengineering all 
efforts must compliment and challenge one another. This is particularly 
significant in an environment that gives all the appearances of organized 
chaos. The continuous improvement process seeks to provide mechanisms that 
guide and support the mission and values of the Medical College of Virginia 
Hospitals (MCVH) in providing quality patient care, education and research. 
The continuous improvement process at MCVH is in transition as we adapt to the 
current industry movements and JCAHO standards which emphasize 
multidisciplinary team efforts, and collaboration in the provision and 
continuum of patient care. These efforts include the development of clinical 
pathways, emphasis on case management and integration of ambulatory services 
into the continuous improvement process.

Research and continuous improvement have a great deal in common. Qualitative 
and quantitative methods easily compare to the continuous improvement 
methodologies, however a different language is used to describe the methods. 
In addition, the development of action science, a type of qualitative study, 
was developed to study systems, implement solutions, and evaluate results, 
thus bridging the gap between continuous improvement and research.

Since the underlying skills of research and continuous improvement are 
similar, the continuous improvement process has benefitted greatly from a 
strong research focus in the institution. A member of our research team 
attends continuous improvement meetings and advises on a number of topics such 
as data collection methods, measurement, and analysis. Two projects will be 
used as examples in which our research program contributed significantly to 
our efforts. These are (1) the measurement of pain satisfaction and (2) 
assessment of falls.

The future holds great wealth for our patients in the new humanistic paradigm 
which encourages examining processes rather than reductionistic approaches 
which examine the effects of one variable while controlling for many 
variables. As we move toward an integrated practice of continuous improvement 
and research, we will seek to improve our data collection techniques (less 
dependance on retrospective chart review), measurement tool development, and 
data analysis. Today's unthinkable possibilities will become tomorrow's 
solutions as researchers and continuous improvement practitioners continue to 
dialogue and practice collaboratively.


\\\\\
The Woman's Experience of Preterm Labor Symptoms: A Time of Uncertainty

Judith H. Poole and Marlene C. Mackey

Despite significant advances in perinatal medicine over the past 40 years, the 
incidence of preterm birth remains unchanged. Low birth weight and prematurity 
prevention are major concerns confronting perinatal care providers today. 
Signs and symptoms of preterm labor reported in medical and nursing literature 
establish the diagnosis of preterm labor. However, symptoms reported by women 
admitted to labor and delivery units with a diagnosis of preterm labor are 
more subtle. The purpose of this study was to explore the symptoms identified 
by the woman that preceded the diagnosis of preterm labor.

Forty Caucasian and Afro-American women, age 14-43, of varying educational and 
income backgrounds, participated in intensive tape-recorded interviews during 
their initial hospitalization for the treatment of preterm labor (before 37 
completed weeks gestation). The semi-structured interview guide consisted of 
open-ended questions focused on identifying life experiences occurring in the 
current pregnancy before admission to the hospital. Using qualitative data 
analysis techniques, women's descriptions of their symptoms of preterm labor 
were organized into the following thematic categories: first inklings, symptom 
awareness, symptom management, symptom confusion, and symptom conflict. 
Findings from this study suggest that women identify when "something was 
different" in the pregnancy. After recognizing that "something was different" 
the woman self-manages the symptoms before calling her health care provider or 
entering the health care system. Self-diagnosis and management of these 
symptoms indicate that the woman's perception of a change in her body can be 
significant in identifying potential problem during pregnancy. This study 
emphasizes the need to further explore the value of the woman's ability to 
identify changes within her body that may signal potential pregnancy 
complications.


\\\\\
Self-Care Agency and Participation in Childbirth Education: Relationships to 
Labor and Delivery

Marcella A. Hart

The purpose of this study was to examine (1) changes in self-care agency and 
prenatal attitude towards childbirth participation after attendance at 
Childbirth Education Classes (CEC); and (2) relationships between self-care 
agency and prenatal attitude towards childbirth participation and the couple's 
evaluation of labor and delivery. Orem's Self-care Deficit Nursing Theory was 
used as the framework for this study.

This was a pre post test correlational survey design with a convenience sample 
of 119 childbirth class couples. The average age of the participants was 30 
years; the majority were Caucasian and college educated and had private 
insurance. The majority of the women were primiparas. Tools measuring 
Self-care Agency (ASA Scale) and Prenatal Attitude Towards Childbirth 
Participation (PATCP) scale were given pre and post childbirth classes. Three 
instruments measuring perceptions of labor and delivery were administered post 
delivery. Descriptive statistics, t tests, and Pearson's correlations were 
used to analyze the date. Analysis showed that self-care agency scores of the 
labor partners were significantly increased after completion of childbirth 
classes giving some support to Orem's theory. The PATCP scores were 
significantly increased for both moms and partners indicating that childbirth 
classes increase couples perception of their ability to have some control in 
labor and delivery. Self-care agency scores for the women were significantly 
correlated with labor agency scores; all results were significant with p<.05.

Study results lend support to Orem's theory and suggest that nurses should 
assess a woman's self-care agency as a way to develop interventions to help 
women better cope with labor. Also the significant increase in the PATCP 
scores indicate childbirth classes do give couples the feeling they have some 
control in labor. Further research is needed into effect of epidurals and 
labor and delivery support on childbirth participation. Increasing the 
understanding of couple's perception of childbirth can help childbirth 
educators in designing and implementing classes to better help pregnant 
couples cope with labor and delivery.


\\\\\
Postpartum Sleep and Assumption of Early Maternal Tasks

Margaret J. Dick, Marilyn L. Evans, Deborah R. Shields, Deborah M. Shook, and 
Mary Beth S. Smith

Rubin's theory of "Puerperal Change" uses the concepts of "taking-in" and 
"taking-hold" to describe the predictable psychological and behavioral 
reactions new mothers experience during the postpartum period. Taking-in is 
characterized by dependent behaviors and concerns and lasts for the first two 
to three postpartum days. Taking-hold is characterized by autonomous behaviors 
and concerns and usually lasts about 10 days; education is best done during 
this phase. Sleep is an essential component of the taking-in phase and is 
vital to the mother's recovery from labor and delivery. The purpose of this 
descriptive correlational study was to examine the relationship of sleep in 
the early postpartum period (hospital setting) to the new mother's progression 
through the phases of taking-in and taking-hold. Taking-in and taking-hold 
were measured with the Martell Postpartum Questionnaire (1984). Sleep 
disturbance and effectiveness were measured with the Visual Analog Sleep Scale 
developed by Verran and Snyder-Halpern (1987). A convenience sample of 120 
women who had normal spontaneous vaginal deliveries between the hours of 6am 
and 5pm were selected for the study. The subjects included both primiparas and 
multiparas. The sample was drawn, from the hospitals in the Southeast. The 
Postpartum Questionnaire was administered on the evening of delivery and on 
the following two mornings, along with the Sleep Scale. A two-tailed test of 
significance with alpha set at 0.05 was used in all study comparisons. Both 
taking-in (X=28.7) and taking-hold (X=26.6) were present on the evening of 
delivery. Paired t-tests indicated a significant decrease in taking-in 
(t=3.23, p=.00)and a significant increase in taking-hold (t=-3.64, p=.00) 
between the evening of delivery and the first morning. Sleep disturbance was 
high on the first night (X=54). There were no significant correlations (r=.15) 
between sleep effectiveness and changes in taking-in scores, or between sleep 
effectiveness and changes in taking-hold (r=.06). Similar correlations were 
found between sleep disturbance and changes in taking-in and taking-hold. 
These findings support Rubin's theory that taking-in decreases and taking-hold 
increases with time. These changes seem to occur despite high levels of sleep 
disturbance. However, Rubin's time frames were not supported; both taking-in 
and taking-hold were equally evident on the evening of delivery. Thus it 
appears that women may be more open to learning about themselves and their 
infants in the early postpartum period than Rubin's theory indicates. In light 
of early discharge patterns, it is important to facilitate periods of 
undisturbed sleep in order to enhance receptiveness to learning.


\\\\\
Postpartal Women's Perceptions of Nursing Care Quality and Value

Dana S. Cunningham and June H. Larrabee

Quality is a major focus in the provision of health care. Larrabee's wholistic 
model of quality proposes that value is related to quality. Because the 
majority of patient contact and care is through nurses, ensuring nursing care 
quality is vital for overall patient well being. Numerous studies have been 
conducted on nursing care quality. However, there is limited research 
pertaining to postpartal nursing care quality and the nursing care behaviors 
that women most value. The purpose of this descriptive study was to 
investigate postpartal womens' perceptions of quality and value of nursing 
care.

A convenience sample of 54 women from a combined mother-baby unit in a 
mid-sized hospital in west Tennessee participated in the study. The sample was 
predominately white (80%), married (65%), worked outside the home (52%), 
reported good or excellent health (94%), and had completed high school (87%).

Quality was operationalized as patient-perceived quality and measured using 
the postpartal subscale of Littlefield's Patient Participation and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (PPSQ) with a five-point Likert scale in which 
"very satisfied" = "1". Value was operationalized as patient-perceived value 
and measured using a researcher-constructed instrument, the Importance Scale. 
This scale repeated the stems for items in the PPSQ's postpartal subscale but 
asked patients to rate the importance of each item using a five-point Likert 
response scale in which "very important" = "1". Cronbach's alpha for the 
postpartal satisfaction subscale was .93 and for the Importance Scale was .91. 
Demographic data included age, race, marital status, number of pregnancies, 
number of live births, type of delivery, employment outside the home, general 
health status, education, and income.

Results for the total scale scores indicated a very high level of patient- 
perceived quality (X=1.2+.5) for combined mother-baby postpartal care. One 
hundred percent of the participants reported being "very satisfied" with two 
aspects of care: 1) the chance to be with and care for the baby when wanted; 
and 2) wishes were taken into consideration with regard to time with the baby. 
Both of these aspects of care were rated as "very important" by 100% of the 
participants. Although the total scale scores also indicated a very high level 
of patient-perceived importance (X=1.1+.3), results indicated that postpartal 
women do value certain nursing care behaviors over others. Further research is 
needed to investigate the relationship between patient-perceived quality and 
patient-perceived value in postpartal women.

The findings suggest that postpartal nurses should focus quality improvement 
efforts on those aspects of care which women value most highly and are least 
satisfied. This strategy should make efficient use of hospital resources while 
improving patient care and patient satisfaction.


\\\\\
Developement and Psychometric Evaluation of the Perceived Environmental 
Uncertainty in Hospitals Scale

Jeanne Salyer

The purpose of this study was to evaluate construct validity and reliability 
of the Perceived Environmental Uncertainty in Hospitals Scale (PEU-H). The 
instrument was developed to measure the degree of perceived unceriainty 
experienced by hospital staaf registered nurses (RNs). Five attributes of the 
environment contribute to perceptions of uncertainty and guided the item 
development process: (1) environmental dynamism, (2) environmental complexity, 
(3) environmental dominance, (4) need for information, and (5S) confidence in 
decision-making. Items were developed with the assistance of RNs in 
medical-surgical, pediatric, and obstetric areas and were critiqued by a 
expert in organizational theory and research. This process ensured that items 
represented attributes of the environment contributing to uncertainty and were 
consistent with conceptual definitions in the literature. Each of the 15 items 
was rated on a scale reflecting the level of agreement with the statement 
(1=strong agreement; 6=strong disagreement). A pilot test of the PEU-H 
conducted on a convenience sample of RNs (N=38) working in medical-surgical, 
critical care, pediatric, psychiatric, rehabilitation, and obstetric areas of 
one medical center and two community hospitals revealed that items were 
readable and clearly written, directions for completion were specific, and 
time for completion of the instrument ranged from 5 to 8 minutes. Item 
response frequency analysis revealed that the full range of response options 
had been selected on all items. Cronbach's alpha for the 15-item scale was 
.78.

A second phase of instrument testing was conducted to further assess internal 
consistency reliability, conduct an item analysis based on data from at least 
5 subjects per item, eliminate items, and examine construct validity. A survey 
questionnaire was distributed to a random sample of 135 staff RNs working in 
medical-surgical and pediatric areas of a university medical center. Seventy 
percent (n=95) of the questionnaires were returns. The sample was 91.6% 
female. Forty-five percent of the subjects were under 30 years of age and 
13.7% were over 45. Fifty-one percent had a baccalaureate degree in nursing. 
Sixty-seven percent reported having three or more years of nursing experience.

When each of the 15 items was examined using item-total and inter-item 
correlation statistics, four items were eliminated because of low inter-item 
and item-total correlations. On the 11 remaining items, item-total 
correlations were consistently > .40. Fifty-one percent of the inter-item 
correlations were > .30. Internal consistency reliability (Cronbach's alpha) 
of the 11-item scale was .83, which is acceptable for a new scale.

Principal components factor analysis (PCA) was performed on the 11-item scale. 
The scree test criterion indicated one substantial factor; however, using 
Kaiser's criterion of considering all unrotated factors with eigenvalues > 1.0 
resulted in two factors that accounted for 50.5% of the variace. A two-factor 
solution was explored using PCA with oblimin rotation. This solution revealed 
one item with a ambiguous loading; hence the one-factor solution was 
considered more interpretable. All factor loadings on the one-factor solution 
were > .50. The eigenvalue for the factor was 4.10 and 37.3% of the variace 
was explained.

Three limitations of the 11-item version were noted. First, items measuring 
confidence in decision making and environmental doninance were eliminated 
because of low item-total and inter-item correlations. Second, the high 
inter-item correlation between items measuring the impact of frequent 
admissions and discharges and frequent transfers on/off the unit indicates 
redundancy. Third, the instrument was tested only with RNs working in 
medical-surgical and pediatric areas of an academic medical center. Further 
testing of a revised instrument using a heterogeneous sample from multiple 
sites is necessary to determine reliability and validity of the PEU-H.


\\\\\
Revision and Testing of an Instrument to Measure Reciprocity in the Dyadic 
Caregiving Relationship
Maranah A. Sauter 

Reciprocity within the dyadic caregiving relationship represents a pattern of 
exchange between caregiver and elder care receiver. This pattern of exchange 
involves give and take which largely determines relationship quality and 
satisfaction. The purpose of this study was to revise and pilot test an 
instrument to measure reciprocity in the dyadic caregiving relationship.

The Caregiver Reciprocity Scale was originally developed by Carruth (1993) to 
measure caregiver reciprocity in adult children caring for elderly parents. 
Conceptually based within a framework of social exchange theory and equity 
theory, The Caregiver Reciprocity Scale consists of a 22 item Likert scale 
measuring the adult child caregiver's perception of reciprocity in the 
caregiving relationship. Because reciprocity involves exchange between 
caregiver and care receiver, the need for an instrument to measure reciprocity 
from the perceptions of both dyad members was recognized.

Revision of the Caregiver Reciprocity Scale followed the theoretical 
distinction between dimensions of reciprocity established through factor 
analysis during the process of instrument development. Dimensions included (a) 
warmth and regard, (b) intrinsic rewards of giving, (c) love and affection, 
and (d) balance within family caregiving. Items were revised to reflect 
perceptions of reciprocity from either member of the caregiving dyad. Items 
judged to be restricted to the present and therefore non-applicable to 
dependent elderly care receivers were revised to permit reflection and 
incorporation of past experiences or perceptions. Refinement of items and 
content validity were established by a panel of experts in caregiving 
research, gerontology, and instrumentation.

The revised instrument was pilot tested with 40 members of caregiving dyads. 
In the pilot study, the revised instrument was utilized as an interview 
schedule with dependent elderly care receivers and their family caregivers to 
assess quality of the caregiving relationship. Internal consistency 
reliability estimates (Cronbach1s alpha) for each dimension of the instrument 
were acceptable with an overall reliability of .82. The revised instrument is 
being tested currently in a larger study of determinants of quality of the 
care relationship with a sample 100 caregiving dyads.


\\\\\
Measuring Anxiety in Critically Ill Patients

JoAnne Herman and Elizabeth Shaw

Measurement of self-report cognitive and affective data from critically ill 
subjects can be very difficult. However, the search for solutions to this 
challenge is necessary because knowledge about the relationships among 
cognitive, affective, and physiological functioning of critically ill patients 
is vital for the development of a theoretical base for critical care nursing 
practice. Traditional instruments pose particular problems because of their 
high cognitive demand. The visual analogue scale (VAS) requires less cognitive 
concentration and is easier and quicker to complete than most instruments. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to establish validity for a VAS to 
measure anxiety in critically ill patients.
Concurrent validity was tested by comparing subject scores on two instruments: 
Speilberger State Anxiety Inventory (SAI) and a researcher generated Visual 
Analogue Scale (VAS). Construct validity was tested by comparing subject 
scores for those on ventilators and those not. It was hypothesized that 
subjects on ventilators would have higher anxiety than subjects who were not 
on ventilators.

The sample consisted of 53 subjects about evenly divided between women (24) 
and men (29). The mean age was 52 years with a range of 20-77. The majority of 
subjects had a high school education and were Caucasian, married, and retired. 
Twenty-four of the subjects were on a ventilator and 29 were not. After 
informed consent was obtained, subject's blood pressure and pulse were 
recorded. Then subjects completed the VAS and SAI. The questionnaires were 
completed in a randomly assigned order.

The mean VAS score for anxiety was 25 with a sd of 31 and a range of 0-100. 
The mean SAI score was 40 with a standard deviation of 14 and a range of 
20-79. The Pearson correlation between the VAS and SAI was .81. There were no 
significant correlations between systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood 
pressure, pulse and either the VAS or the SAI. T-test analysis of VAS scores 
between the ventilator group and the non-ventilator group revealed a 
statistically significant difference. Subjects in the ventilator group scored 
significantly higher (33) than non-ventilator subjects (19). Findings from 
this study establish preliminary validity for the VAS to measure anxiety in 
critically ill patients.


\\\\\
Concurrent Validity for a Tool to Measure Anxiety in Laboring Women

Elizabeth J. Shaw

Specific Aims: During the past decade a number of interdisciplinary efforts 
have focused on the role of higher-order mental processes in health and 
disease. Psycho-biological research has evolved from superficial correlational 
analyses to a recognition of the indivisible nature of cognitive, affective, 
and biological processes. Consistent with this paradigm shift, a new category 
of risk has evolved as a contributing variable in poor perinatal outcomes: 
stress, both physical and psychosocial (Institute of Medicine, 1985). Maternal 
anxiety and mood disturbances have now been implicated as etiological 
antecedents to poor perinatal outcomes. Interventions to mediate the maternal 
stress response are also being redefined. Anecdotal evidence of the 
effectiveness of self-regulation techniques such as relaxation, hypnosis, and 
biofeedback to reduce anxiety is beginning to accumulate in the nursing 
literature. However, to test hypotheses that self-regulatory and relaxation 
therapies facilitate psychological and physiological stress reduction, the 
critical intervening variable of anxiety must be measured. Therefore, the 
purpose of this study was to establish concurrent validity for a tool to 
measure anxiety in laboring women. As the VAS was hypothesized as an ideal 
instrument for use in laboring women, concurrent validity of the VAS was 
sought through the correlation with a criterion instrument well established in 
clinical research as a reliable measure of anxiety (SAI).

Subjects: The women participating in this study (N=51) were 14 to 42 years old 
with a mean age of 23.7 years. The majority of the women were African-American 
(74.5%). The remaining women were Caucasian, Asian, and Hispanic.

Setting: The study was conducted in the labor and delivery unit of a large 
teaching hospital in a Southeastern metropolitan city.

Instruments: Two instrments were used in this correlational study: The State 
Anxiety Inventory and the anxiety visual analogue scale (VAS).

Procedure: The conduct of this study was approved by the institutional review 
board of the medical cater. Data were collected January-June, 1994. 
Demographic, obstetrical, labor, and delivery data were collected by patient 
interview and medical chart review. Laboring women were then asked to rate the 
intensity of their anxiety at that moment on the VAS and fill out the SAI 
using a standardized instructional protocol. The order in which the 
instruments were completed was randomly assigned to control for testing 
sensitization.

Results: A strong positive correlation was found between the SAI and VAS 
(0.72; p<.0001). Fifty perceet of the variance in scores on the VAS can be 
explained by the variance in SAI scores.

Implications: This study provides perinatal researchers focusing on the 
cognitive and emotive processes underlying poor perinatal outcomes with the 
validation of a reliable measure of anxiety easy to use in the clinical 
setting. Rigor in the assessment of metric properties of instruments and 
methods, and the selection and use of tools with evidence of good reliability 
and validity, will allow for the placement of a high level of confidence in 
the findings and interpretations of nursing research (Strickland & Waltz, 
1986).


\\\\\
The Lived Experience of Caring in Everyday Life

Savina O. Schoenhofer, Maureen Propst, Vicki Bingham, Martha Clinton, Patricia 
DuBard, Georgia Hutchins, Deborah McGehee, and Sherry Senseney

The specific aim of this research was to evolve a structural description of 
the phenomenon of living caring in everyday life. Participants, in a total of 
13 groups, were volunteers identified by word of mouth, and reflect a wide 
range of age, role and culture. The method, innovated for this study, was a 
group form of group Colaizzi-style phenomenology in which participants not 
only shared stories of their lived experiences of everyday caring but also 
evolved themes and metathemes from the stories. Data generation occurred over 
a three month period in small group natural settings, with one or two 
researchers and three to five research participants in each group. Initial 
synthesis was accomplished by research participants. After completion of all 
data generation, project researchers synthesized essential themes and the 
structural description of the phenomenon in a reflective group process. 
Essential themes were found to be: caring is evidenced by empathetic 
understanding action and patience on another's behalf; caring for one another 
by actions, words, and being there leads to happiness and touches the heart; 
caring is a giving of self while preserving the importance of self, and leads 
to fulfillment. A metatheme was evolved: everyday caring is giving of oneself 
on another's behalf. Implications include enrichment of the language of caring 
and enhancement of the foundation for studying caring in nursing situations.


\\\\\
Meta-Synthesis: A Qualitative Method to Develop a Caring Model for Nursing

Gwen Sherwood

Aim: The accumulation of qualitative studies defining caring from the client's 
perspective created a need to synthesize the results for advancement of 
nurses' caring theory. Meta-synthesis was the method used to aggregate 
findings of nurses' caring as described by clients from the existing 
qualitative studies to derive more substantive interpretations than available 
from single studies. The recovery and synthesis of the essential patterns and 
common themes from multiple studies offers refinement of the current state of 
caring knowledge leading to an inductively derived model.

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to identify the extant qualitative 
nursing research literature investigating caring from the perspective of the 
client to complete a meta-synthesis of the findings.

Method: The goals of meta-synthesis are comparable to those for meta-analysis 
used for qualitative studies: to integrate, synthesize and organize research 
results into coherent patterns which can be more easily applied to clinical 
practice. Data were merged from across studies into a common data pool and 
studied. Through analysis and synthesis, data were collapsed into essential 
patterns with explanatory themes. The final step was to express the synthesis 
with a composite description by narrating patterns and/or themes to explain 
what is taking place.

Findings: The 16 qualitative studies conducted between 1975 and 1993 comprised 
the data pool with an aggregate of 353 respondents. Using meta-synthesis to 
aggregate the findings from 16 qualitative studies on nurses' caring from the 
perspective of patients, an operational model of nurses' caring emerged. The 
patterns and themes uncovered describe caring within the context, content, and 
process of caring acted upon by the attributes and knowledge of the nurse 
leading to therapeutic outcomes. The operational model provides the structure 
to formulate research into the therapeutics of caring, advancing nursing 
theory. Caring is built on a model of interaction based on context, content 
and process for goal-directed, therapeutic outcomes, presumed to be healing. 
The concerned interactive presence of the nurse offers vigilance and 
surveillance to anticipate the unique physical and mental needs of each 
client, creating trust that the nurse is "right on top of things." Based on 
knowing and being with, belief in the client enables a hope-filled attitude 
promoting and understanding the personal meaning of the health care experience 
to the client.


\\\\\
The Relationship Between Pain Disclosure and Perceived Confirmation in the 
Experience of Postoperative Clients

Patricia Louise Muar

The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible relationship between 
client disclosure of postoperative incisional pain to nursing caregivers and 
client perception of caregiver response to previous pain disclosure. The 
question posed by the study was asked as follows: Does perception of 
confirmation in caregiver response to previous pain disclosure provide for 
significantly better classification of clients into groups than does the 
combination of perceived pain intensity, perceived distress from pain, client 
control of analgesic medication, and trait anxiety?

The theoretical framework for this investigation was drawn from King's Theory 
for Nursing and Siebold's Theory of Confirmation in Interpersonal 
Communication. Data was collected from 60 adults age 22 to 69 years who were 
hospitalized for elective surgery requiring a hospital stay of at least 48 
hours. Forty participants were male and 20 female. Thirty-two percent reported 
less than 12 years of formal education. Sixty-two percent were married. 
Variables controlled in the process of sample selection included age, 
ethnicity, personal history of chronic pain and experience with a family 
member having chronic pain.

Participants were interviewed preoperatively including completion of the 
State/Trait Anxiety Inventory and instruction in the use of a visual analogue 
scale. On the evening of their first postoperative day, participants were 
asked to describe their experience the first time they got out of bed after 
surgery. They were asked to describe perceived pain intensity and distress 
using a 10 cm visual analogue scale. They were asked whether they told the 
caregiver that they were experiencing pain. Those who answered affirmatively 
were asked to use a visual analogue scale to describe the amount of distress 
communicated to the caregiver. All participants completed the Perceived 
Confirmation Scale to describe how caregivers made them feel when they talked 
about their pain.

Ten of 60 participants (16.6%) did not disclose the presence of pain to the 
caregiver. Discriminant function analysis showed a 10% improvement in correct 
classification of the sample into disclosure or nondisclosure groups when 
confirmation scores were included in the analysis. Participant gender was not 
controlled in sample selection. A t-test for independent samples showed 
significant differences in expressed distress scores by gender. Mean expressed 
distress scores for females were greater than those for males.

Participants who reported experiencing less distress than disclosed to the 
caregiver had significantly lower mean confirmation scores than those who 
reported the same or more distress (F=3.75, p=.03). Females were more likely 
to disclose less distress to the caregiver than they reported experiencing 
(chisq= 11.69, p=.003). Males were more likely to disclose the same amount of 
distress they reported.

The study findings suggest that perception of confirmation in caregiver 
response to previous pain disclosure is related to disclosure of pain to 
caregivers. The number of females in the sample was quite small, but the 
results also suggest that gender may be a mediating factor in this 
relationship. The relationship between pain disclosure and confirmation merits 
further study. Caregivers who are open to patient reports of pain and 
accepting of their validity may encourage accurate reporting of the presence 
and intensity of pain especially from female clients.


\\\\\
Cognitive-Behavioral Appraoches for Postoperative Pain Management with Adults: 
A Meta-Analysis

Joanne M. Laframboise

Non-pharmacological interventions have been recommended for use with surgical 
patients as adjuvant therapies along with narcotic analgesia to relieve acute 
postoperative pain. The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral approaches for 
postoperative pain management has been examined empirically; however, the 
types of surgical patient groups sampled, cognitive-behavioral approaches 
examined, implementation procedures used, and outcome variables measured to 
determine treatment effects varied considerably, making it difficult to make 
inferences about the efficacy of these approaches. The specific aim of this 
study was to obtain published experimental studies from the past 15 years in 
which the cognitive-behavioral appraoches of simple relaxation, music therapy, 
and pleasant imagery were examined. Twelve "subject-studies" met the inclusion 
criteria and comprised the sample for this meta-analytic review. Methodologic 
and substantiative study characteristics (independent variables) wer coded 
using a published prototype tool. Seven outcome measures, including self-
report and behavioral responses, were used to measure treatment effects on 
postoperative pain (dependent variable). A total of twenty-eight individual 
effect sizes were calculated. Weighted, mean effect sizes for the seven 
outcome measures ranged from -0.36 to -1.08 (a negative direction for effect 
indicated a favorable outcome for the treatment group). From a clinical 
perspective, these data can be interpreted as subjects in an experimental 
group experienced, on average, a 27% reduction in postoperative pain when 
compared with 71% of subjects in the control group. Results from this 
quantitative review support the recommendations put forth by the Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
in the 1992 publication, Clinical Practice Guideline, Acute Pain Management: 
Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma.


\\\\\
Enhancing Growth in Children

Elizabeth Reifsnider

The specific aim of the study was to investigate the effects of a community 
health nursing intervention on children with growth delay enrolled in WIC in 
central Texas. Hypotheses concerning growth quotients for weight, length, 
daily intake of calories and protein, parent-child interaction, home 
environment, community life skills and perceived stress of the mother were 
tested in a pre-test, post-test design with a sample of 39 children with 
growth delay, randomly assigned to control or experimental groups. The 
children were identified in WIC clinics in local health departments as being 
growth delayed. Their families were contacted by the researcher and invited to 
participate in a study on children's growth, but the families were not 
informed as to which group their child bad been assigned.
The instruments used were: a balance-beam infant scale, an infant length 
board, a 24-hour diet recall and a four-day prospective food record, the Home 
Observation for Measurement of the Environment (HOME) Inventory, Community 
Life Skills Scale (CLSS), Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and the Infant and 
Toddler Temperament Scale/Questionnaire. Following preliminary data collection 
for the entire sample, a nursing intervention was administered to the 
experimental group during home visits. The intervention included education on 
nutrition, parenting and community life skills.

Posttest data were collected on the two groups by a research assistant blind 
to group assignment. The data was analyzed using independent t-tests for the 
growth quotients for weight and height, and dependent t-tests for the data on 
daily intake of calories and protein, and a MANOVA for the HOME, CLSS and PSS. 
Quantitative findings, (at p<.05) indicated positive changes in the 
experimental group's weight growth quotient, diet, home environment, and 
maternal perceived stress. For this presentation, the focus will be on the 
data concerning weight and dietary intake. This research has demonstrated that 
community health nurses through use of targeted interventions on parenting and 
nutrition education may assist parents in ameliorating the effects of growth 
delay on their children.


\\\\\
Weight-Related Distress After Childbirth

Lorraine O. Walker and Luci B. Johnson

Following recent increases in how much weight women are advised to gain during 
pregnancy, concern exists that some women may become overweight following 
childbirth. At present, experts estimate the U.S. women retain an average of 
2.2 lb (1 kg) as a result of childbearing. This modest average gain, however, 
masks great variability in gains, with some women having substantial gains 
after childbirth. Moreover, increasingly precise scientific measurement of 
weight gain related to childbearing fails to take into account an additional 
dimension: how women psychologically experience such weight gain. As a result, 
the aim of this paper is to describe the phenomenon of weight-related distress 
after childbirth and the characteristics of women who experience such 
distress.

As part of a larger postpartum survey, women were asked to give brief, 
open-ended descriptions of their feelings about their current weight. The 
survey was conducted 2.5 to 6 months after women had given birth. Of 244 women 
who participated in the survey, 239 provided usable statements regarding their 
weight. Two of these were omitted because of incomplete data or failing to 
meet study criteria for inclusion. Women's weight-related statements were 
coded into 6 categories which ranged from seeing themselves as underweight to 
experiencing weight-related distress. Such distress was indicated by comments 
that mentioned loss of self-esteem, feeling awful about current weight, or 
other comments that indicated more than mild dissatisfaction with weight. 
Approximately 10% of women were classified as experiencing weight-related 
distress.

Analyses are underway to identify sociodemographic and anthropometric 
characteristics of women who experienced weight-related distress. These will 
be presented with an eye to identifying profile of women likely to experience 
weight-related distress. Overall, women who experience weight-related distress 
had higher weight gains during pregnancy, higher body image dissatisfaction at 
postpartum, and higher amounts of postpartum weight gain. Other factors such 
as infant birth weight and maternal age were not associated with 
weight-related distress.


\\\\\
Seeking Solace Through Eating

Sheryl S. Russell

The search to unravel the complex phenomenon of obesity has been pursued for 
centuries. Theoretical postulations regarding the etiology of obesity and 
subsequent management strategies are numerous and complex. Despite decades of 
clinical application, the rising prevalence of obesity remains essentially 
unchanged. Clearly it is time to consider a new perspective.

A grounded theory design provided the opportunity to explore this phenomenon 
in a new light. Strauss and Corbin's (1990), approach to grounded theory 
methodology was utilized to answer the question, "What are the social 
processes involved in eating and obesity?" Primary, purposive, network, sample 
selection utilizing a snowball technique was employed to identify potential 
study participants. Study participants were obese, adult, American, Caucasian 
women between the ages of 21 and 55 who identified food issues as problematic. 
Obesity was defined as a BMI (body mass index) of greater than or equal to 
27.3. The investigation of obesity and the experience of eating was conducted 
through unstructured interviews. Participants were asked one initial question, 
"Tell me about a recent eating experience that was problematic for you." 
Interviews were audio taped and transcribed. Consistent with Strauss and 
Corbin (1990), sample selection continued until saturation was achieved and no 
new themes emerged. The transcripts were analyzed and the core category was 
identified as eating and reflected the phenomenon of central concern and most 
frequent occurrence in the data. The theory of seeking solace emerged as a 
process of the experience of eating and obesity in these women.

This study attempts to understand the phenomenon of eating in adult, obese, 
American, Caucasian women from the perspective of the reality of the women who 
experience it. The resulting theory of seeking solace through eating emerged 
from the context of the social process in which it was embedded. Embracing 
this new understandihg of eating and obesity, realistic strategies may be 
designed to promote health and reduce the associated morbidity and mortality. 
Nursing interfaces with people at all phases of the life cycle and, therefore, 
is in a unique position to influence this continued health problem.


\\\\\
Examining the Relationship Between Nonpurge Binge Eating Severity and Weight 
in Women Using the Set Point Theory

Gayle M. Timmerman

The purpose of this presentation is to examine the relationship between 
nonpurge binge eating severity and weight in women using the set point theory 
as the conceptual framework. Selected findings from a research study with a 
voluntary sample of nonpurge binge eating women from varying age groups will 
be used to provide a better understanding of how the set point theory can be 
used to explain the relationship of nonpurge binge eating and weight.

Nonpurge binge eating is the uncontrolled eating of a large amount of food in 
a specific period of time without compensatory purging behaviors 
characteristic of bulimia nervosa. Although binge eating is a prevalent 
problem in the obese population (20-50%), the relationship between binge 
eating and degree of obesity has not been adequately explored.

According to the set point theory of energy regulation, weight is regulated 
within the parameters of a specific level or set point. Stability is 
maintained by balancing energy intake with energy expenditure. However, the 
increased metabolic rate associated with increased energy intake appears to be 
temporary. Past research findings indicate that the set point can become 
elevated with prolonged overfeeding of high fat diets. Obesity is thought to 
represent the regulation of weight at an elevated set point.

Based on the set point theory, a model for binge-induced obesity was 
hypothesized for this study: 1) when binge episodes become a frequent, regular 
pattern, the body's set point would become elevated; and 2) a long history of 
binge eating would contribute to degree of obesity by progressively elevating 
the set point.

In this study, binge eating severity was measured by adding the calorie intake 
during each binge episode (> 1,000 kcal/episode) as recorded in food diaries 
over 28 days. Degree of obesity was measured by percent of body fat and body 
mass index (BMI). Binge eating severity had a low, but significant association 
with BMI and was not significantly related to percent of body fat. The low 
correlations failed to support the proposed model for binge-induced obesity.

The large fluctuations in binge eating patterns may explain the low 
correlations between binge eating severity and degree of obesity. The 
variability in binge frequency and amount consumed during binges over time 
contradicts the assumption that binge episodes become frequent and regular 
enough to elevate the set point. Thus, the binge-induced model for obesity may 
only hold true for the subset of binge eaters with a progressive increase in 
binge eating severity over time. Another possible explanation may be that 
amount of fat consumed during binges, rather than the amount of calories, has 
a stronger relationship to degree of obesity.


\\\\\
Intrinsic Factors Influencing Health Promotion in Elderly African-American 
Women

Rachel Taylor

The alm of this predictive correlational study was to examine the value of 
health self-determinism, health promotion, and selected demographic variables 
as predictors of perceived health status in elderly African-American women. 
The research questions for this study were: (1) Is there a significant 
predictive relationship between Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) 
scores and Health Self-Determinism Index (HSDI) scores with Current Health 
Status (CHS) scores in elderly African-American women? (2) What are the 
effects of demographic variables of age, last occupation, income, education, 
and Health-Promoting Lifestyle (HPLP) subscales on the Current Health Scale 
(CHS) scores in elderly Africa-American women?

A second aim was to qualitatively explore what being healthy meant to these 
women and what they considered important about their health. A convenience 
sample of 100 African-American women (65-89 years of age) completed the 
Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP), the Health Self-Determinism Index 
(HSDI), and the Current Health Scale (CHS). The data were analyzed using 
descriptive statistics, correlational analysis, and multiple regression. 
Findings revealed statistically significant linear relationships between 
health promotion and health self-determinism (r=.272; p=0.01), between health 
self-determinism and perceived health status (r=.268; p=.01), and between 
health promotion and perceived health status (r=.234; p=.02). Regression 
analysis showed health self-determinism as measured by the HSDI to be a 
significant predictor of perceived health status as measured by the CHS 
(t=2.55; p=.0123). Stepwise regression showed a statistically significant 
predictive relationship among income, self-actualization, and interpesonal 
support with perceived health status (F=6.263; p=.0021). Health 
conceptualization was examined with the question: "What is it for you to be 
healthy?" Five major themes emerged from the responses to this question and 
were analyzed for congruence with the four dimensions of health conceptualized 
by Smith (1981). The major themes were mental and physical well-being, absence 
of pain or disability, personal responsibillty for health and illness, 
spiritual blessing, and happiness with the current state of health. Health 
value was examined with the question: "Is your health important to you? Why?" 
Three categories which emerged were desire for independence, desire for long 
life and better quality of life, and joy in living. The implications of the 
study derived from the findings support the premise that the relationship 
between health promotion, health self-determinism and perceived health status 
is multidimensional and that it warrants further exploration of the intrinsic 
factors which impact on health promotion in a older population. The extended 
life span and the acknowledged need for better quality of life to accompany 
the advance in life span justify this concern. It is recommended that nurses 
implement programs which emphasize wellness and health promotion in 
African-American women.


\\\\\
Intensive Care Outcomes in an Elderly Population

Suzanne S. Prevost

As the incentives of managed care force us to scrutinize expensive 
interventions, we must continually evaluate the outcomes of critical care for 
high risk populations. The elderly are one high risk group that is being seen 
with increasing frequency in intensive care units. Critical care nurses often 
ponder questions related to the appropriateness and potential futility of 
intensive care for the elderly.

Research questions posed in this study were: 1) What are the demographic 
characteristics of elderly patients admitted to an intensive care unit? 2) 
What are the outcomes for the elderly after discharge from intensive care? and 
3) Are there relationships between demographic characteristics and outcomes, 
in a critically ill elderly population?

Methods: In this descriptive, correlational study, we followed 120 patients 
over age 70 who were cared for in an intensive care unit for greater than 36 
hours. The setting was a 16 bed mixed medical-surgical unit in a community 
hospital.

Findings: The mean age was 77.7 years, mean ICU length of stay - 7.6 days, 
mean hospital length of stay - 17.8 days, and mean charges $47,331. 47.5% of 
subjects were discharged to their homes, 16.7% to other hospitals or 
rehabilitation facilities, 10% to nursing homes, and 25% expired prior to 
hospital discharge. Mortality was higher in men (30.6%), than women (23.2%), 
and higher in widowed/single (32.8%) than married (14.6%) subjects. Spearman 
correlations revealed relationships between age and discharge status (p<.0001) 
and ICU length of stay and discharge status (p<.0001). The relationship 
between age and charges was not significant.

Implications: Although the mortality rate and charges were high, overall 
discharge outcomes were positive, consistent with previous studies which have 
denounced the use of age as a criterion for ICU bed allocation. 
Recommendations for future research include expansion of the study to more 
than one institution and a broader ethnic representation; and investigation of 
the influence of marital status on mortality in this population.


\\\\\
Effectiveness of Pattern-Specific Nursing Interventions in Hypoxia-Related 
Acute Confusional States in Older Patients

V. Neelon, N. Ng'andu, J. Miller, J. Carlson, M. Belyea, D. Baily, and M. 
Champagne

INTRODUCTION: Acute confusion or delirium is a transient syndrome 
characterized primarily by abnormalities in attention and cognition, but 
disordered psychomotor behavior, sleep-wake disturbances, and autonomic 
nervous system disturbances are not uncommon (Engel & Romano, 1959; Lipowski, 
1990). Acute confusion is common in hospitalized elderly, particularly 
patients with underlying chronic cognitive impairnent (Chisholm et al., 1982; 
Foreman, 1989; Neelon et al., 1989; Williams et al., 1985). Patients who 
develop acute confusional states have high morbidity and mortallty, both 
during hospitalization and after discharge (Francis & Kapoor, 1992; Gillick et 
al. 1982; Levkoff et al., 1992). Because acute confusion has multiple causes 
and varied patterns of clinical manifestations, we hypothesized that early 
identification and treatment of patients using pattern-specific interventions 
would be more effective than usual care (Neelon et al., 1992). We report in 
this paper the effects of nurse-initiated, pattern-specific protocols among 
patients treated for hypoxia-related acute confusion.

METHODS: We used a prospective, repeated measures experimental design to test 
pattern-specific interventions in 225 general medical patients (age 65+) 
assessed at admission for risk factors and presence of acute confusion 
(NEECHAM Confusion Scale score < 25 on a 0-30 scale). We used a RISK-INDICATOR 
SCREEN developed from clinical observation and likelihood ratios of key 
patient variables to classify patients' risk and patterns. Using regression 
analysis, we evaluated the effects of treatment by change in NEECHAM scores 
over the first 24 hours as the key outcome measure.

RESULTS: Of the 175 identified as at risk or confused at admission, 98 
received pattern-specific interventions on the treatment unit, and 77 were 
followed on the usual care unit. Using multiple regression and controlling for 
covariates, interventions showed a positive and significant effect on NEECHAM 
scores (beta= 1.40, p=.02). Using logistic regression to evaluate a clinically 
significant response at 24 hours, the odds of improving 4 points or more in 
NEECHAM score for treated patients were 2.49 (95%CI=1.01, 6.15). Patients who 
responded were more likely to have lower oxygen saturations (p=.001), poorer 
nutritional status (p=.001), and markers of chronic cognitive imparrment 
(p=.03). Those positive for hypoxia-related confusion improved with treatment 
(beta=2.04, p=.01). The precise mechanisms underlying the effects of 
intervention on hypoxic patterned patients are under study, however, analysis 
of NEECHAM items score changes indicate that patients improved both in 
cognitive function (beta=0.38 ,p=.02) and oxygen stability (beta=0.69 ,p=.04). 
These data support our hypotheses that early identification and treatment of 
elderly patients with acute confusion using pattern-specific protocols are 
effective, at least in the initial 24 hours of treatment.


\\\\\
Perceptions of Health in Elders

Sandra Hutto Faria

As the older adult population continues to increase, health promotion is a 
growing concern for health care professionals. An individual's perception of 
health plays a vital role in health teaching and health behaviors. The purpose 
of this descriptive study was to explore health as perceived by older adults. 
Interviews were conducted with approximately 30 elders to answer the 
questions: (A) "What does the term health status mean to you?", and (B) "Do 
you think you can control your health status?" A convenience sample of elders 
was obtained from various Elder Care Services programs in a city in the 
Southeastern United States.

Content Analysis of the interview data to elicit recurrent themes was done. 
Elders described health as being able "to do and to go" as they desire. They 
revealed that they can control their health by having adequeate exercise and 
food, staying active, and by maintaining a positive attitude. Ability to 
maintain their independence was the primary factor described which influenced 
whether they perceived themselves to be in good health or poor health. These 
findings indicate that elders perceive independece as being vital to good 
health. Therefore, recommendations for clinical practice include utilization 
of interventions which promote independece as much as possible. Guidance and 
support of independece in elders is important in order to enable them to 
improve their health status.


\\\\\
What is the Child's Role?

Sharon D. Horner

"Who are You?" said the Caterpillar.
Alice replied, rather shyly, "I - I hardly know, sir, just at present - at 
least I know who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have 
been changed several times since then."  Lewis Carroll, 1865/1989.

A survey of nursin gliterature reveals that much of the research on families 
addresses parental concerns. There are fewer studies that address the child's 
perspective with the child as the informant. The question addressed in this 
presentation is: Given the range of developmental capabilities, at what point 
is the child considered a valid data source in the research design? The 
answer, in part, depends on the research question. After identifying a 
research question, one must then decide who or what is the best data source 
for answering the question. Because children are situated within families, the 
growing body of literature on family research provides a framework for 
exploring the central question of data source.

In many studies of children, the data source is an adult -- either a teacher, 
a parent, an observer, or other peson with some connection to the child. 
Traditionally family researchers have relied on a single informant for 
information about family phenomena, including child health and illness 
processes. This trend may stem, in part, from positivistic assumptions about 
the need for objectivity to render the research product validity. Based on 
this assumption, the child is not considered an "accurate" source of data, 
because of lack of insight or perspective for interpreting experiences. While 
children may prove to be "weak" sources for historical facts, they are rich 
sources of interpretive insights into thier lived experiences. As nursing 
science techniques have "matured," this positivisitic assumption is 
challenged, and the child is being included as a valid data source in studies 
which strive to uncover the total picture of the child's health and illness 
experiences.

Strengths and weaknesses of research designs using children and/or adults as 
data sources in studies of children's health and illness experiences will be 
discussed. Mechanisms for enhancing data validity will be discussed with 
examples from current research presented.


\\\\\
Children's Development and Ethical Implications

Barbara Conrad

Many researchers fail to institute appropriate safeguards to protect children 
from exploitation. In fact, the record of research done on children has led 
Lederer and Grodin (1994) to conclude that, "The history of pediatric 
experimentation is largely one of child abuse" (p. 19). To some extent 
exploitation occurs because investigators are naive about the differences 
between adults and children and the additional precautions necessary to insure 
the protection of children's rights. This paper addresses ethical issues 
related to research with children. A developmental perspective provides the 
framework for discussing the inclusion of children in research. Justification 
for including children as subjects, research design implications, and human 
subjects safeguards specific to children are addressed.

An historical overview places the current status of research with children in 
context. Issues such as children's capacity to understand what is being asked 
of them, their ability to exercise their rights, and their vulnerability as 
participants in research studies are addressed. A survey of current research 
involving children provides the basis for elaborating the ethical issues 
specific to children as subjects.

A synthesis of research guidelines of several pediatric professional 
organizations provides the foundation for future recommendations. The paper 
concludes with a summary of the ethical issues that researchers and reviewers 
need to consider when a research design includes children as research 
subjects.


\\\\\
Methodology and Children: Overcoming Barriers

Melanie Smith Percy

Traditionally, children have been studied from an adult perspective. A review 
of current literature demonstrated the prevalence of parental reporting in 
research designs focusing on children. Not surprisingly infants, and young 
children are most frequently studied by observation or parental report. As 
children become verbal they are more likely to be directly involved in the 
study as a data source. Visual analog scales, paper and pencil tests, 
observation and interviews are common techniques for verbal children. 
Biological parameters are generally gathered through non-invasive means.

Any research design involving children as the data source must be tailored to 
the child's developmental level. Fine and gross motor co-ordination, activity 
level, expressive and receptive language ability, attention span, and reading 
level are areas of concern when planning research with children. Whether using 
a quantitative or qualitative method developmental issues remain paramount in 
design development. Structuring the research to include a variety of different 
activitieis helps to prevent boredom and maintains the child's interest in the 
research process. Children are frequently intimidated by adult authority 
figures and may be inhibited by one-to-one contact with an adult researcher. A 
group of peers can provide feelings of safety and security for the child who 
is uncomfortable with adults. Group data gathering techniques facilitate 
communication between the child and researcher. The researcher must also be 
aware of the child's physical needs. Conducting the interview in a comfortable 
room, accepting the child's need to move about, or providing snacks are 
necessary adaptations to the research process.

Developmental considerations critical to research design will be discussed. 
Specific examples and techniques appropriate to each age group will be 
delineated. Experience using children's photography, video tapings, and 
drawings in qualitative research projects will be presented.


\\\\\
The Effect of Respite Care Training on Volunteers' Attitudes, Commitment, 
Self-Esteem, and Knowledge

Kay F. Kiesler and Karen Robinson

Purpose: The purpose of this study was to look at the effects of respite care 
training on attitude toward the mentally impaired, commitment to support a 
caregiver, self-esteem, and knowledge about Alzheimer's disease in volunteers 
attending a one day, seven hour respite training program.

Sample: Thirty-four volunteers were studied.

Methods: Each volunteer completed scales on attitude toward the mentally 
impaired, commitment to support a caregiver, self-esteem, knowledge about 
Alzheimer's disease and demographic data. Descriptive statistics, correlation, 
oneway ANOVA, independent t-test and paired t-test were used to analyze data.

Findings: Data analysis is in process; the following reflects the findings of 
the first 24 subjects. Fifty-eight percent of the sample had family experience 
with caregiving. Knowledge about Alzheimer's disease significantly increased 
after respite training (pre-test M=8, post-test M=9, t=-3.21, P=.004). 
Although the other variables were not significant, examination of mean post-
test scores indicated that the training generally resulted in increased 
knowledge, self-esteem, commitment and more positive attitudes. The only 
attitude not increased with attitude toward urinary incontinence. Male self-
esteem scores (M=45) were higher when compared to female (M=40) self-esteem 
scores (t=2.18, P=.04). Post-training increased age (r=-.42, p<.05) was found 
negatively related to positive self-esteem. Older volunteers had lower self-
esteem scores post-training. Increased knowledge (r=-.52, p<.05) was 
negatively related to positive post-training attitude toward a person who 
wanders. At post-training, the more knowledgeable the volunteer, the worse the 
attitude was toward a person who wanders. This finding may reflect increased 
awareness of the dnager involved in wandering behavior.

Conclusions: These results have implications for nursing. Respite care 
training can be performed in a one day program with positive outcomes. Future 
recruitment efforts for respite care training might meet with more success by 
seeking individuals who have past experience in caregiving. Only by evaluating 
the effectiveness of the training can knowledge be gained about how the 
training impacts the volunteers' self-esteem, attitudes, and/or commitment to 
the caregiver and the mentally impaired.


\\\\\
Spousal Interactions in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and Stroke Caregiving: Impact 
on Care Receivers' Health

Lore K. Wright and Joanne V. Hickey

Problem: There is beginning evidence that quantity and quality of interactions 
between caregivers and care receivers impact the health of care receivers. 
However, the extent to which illness characteristics influence interactions 
remains unclear. This longitudinal pilot study investigated spousal 
interactions in AD and stroke situations. Many functional impairments in AD 
and stroke are similar; however, AD is characterized by irreversible, 
progressive cognitive and functional decline, while a stroke is a sudden 
event, and there is potential for recovery during the six month period 
following an acute infarct. This study attempted to answer whether two 
illnesses with similar functional impairments but divergent illness 
trajectories (i.e. downward in AD; upward following a stroke) differentially 
affect spousal interactions and whether quantity and quality of interactions 
are related to longitudinal health changes in care receivers.

Sample and Design: The sample comprised 42 couples (n=84 spouses) equally 
divided between three conditions: 1) Early phase AD (Mini Mental 21); 2) Right 
hemisphere stroke, 12 weeks post infarct (Mini Mental 23); and 3) Healthy 
controls matched by age and length of marriage. Interactions were assessed at 
baseline (T1) and six months later (T2) through home interviews. Measures of 
interactions included companionship, tension, affection, mutuality, and 
commitment (Spanier & Thompson, 1982; Archbold et al., 1990; alpha 
coefficients of subscales ranged from .58 to .91).

Findings: At T1, quantity and quality of interactions were significantly lower 
among AD couples than stroke and control group couples (p<.05). For the stroke 
group, only quality of interactions was negatively affected (<.05). There were 
no significant changes in interactions over six months for all three groups. 
Positive spousal interactions at T1 were significantly related to T2 better 
physical health in AD afflicted spouses (p<.05) and to improved ADL for stroke 
victims (p<.01). Both AD afflicted and stroke victim spouses increased in 
depressive moods between Tl and T2; however, spousal interactions related to 
depressed moods were not in the predicted direction and were more difficult to 
interpret.

Conclusion: It appears that the two divergent illness trajectories 
(progressively downward in AD but potentially upward following a stroke), 
affect spousal interactions differently even at the beginning of each 
trajectory. Nevertheless, higher quantity and quality of interactions seem to 
protect AD afflicted spouses' physical health and improve functional abilities 
in stroke victims. Increased depression despite positive spousal interactions 
may be due to early phase AD afflicted spouses' awareness of loss of 
husband-wife reciprocity and to stroke victim spouses' grief response related 
to sudden, stroke-induced limitations. Nursing implications will be discussed.


\\\\\
Needs Reported by Family Members of Critically Ill Patients Over Time

Janet Flynn Mulroy

The perceptions of family members about their experiences with critical care 
are important to successful outcomes. The purpose of this descriptive study 
was to investigate the needs of families of patients with prolonged lengths of 
stay in critical care units in a large private metropolitian hospital in the 
Mid-South. A volunteer, convience sample of 45 adults aged 18 or older was 
obtained from family members of critically ill patients whose Theraputic 
Intervention Scoring System (TISS) scores demonstrated high levels of acuity 
at this institution. Each of the volunteering family members was asked to give 
consent after being informed of the purpose of the study, given the 
opportunity to ask questions, and assured of complete confidentiality. The 
instrument used to collect data was the Critical Care Family Needs Inventory 
created by Molter and Leske. The family members were asked to rate on a scale 
of 1-4 how important a need was to them and to answer whether the need was 
currently being met or not being met. A demographic data collection tool was 
also completed. The family members were asked to complete an inventory within 
72 hours of the patient's admission to the intensive care unit and again at 10 
to 14 days. Means were calculated to rank the importance of reported needs for 
the two time periods. The data was analyzed using Student's t-tests to compare 
ratings of needs at the different time frames. T-tests were also used to 
compare changes in rating the importance of needs as length of stay for the 
patient progressed. The results were that the family members of critically ill 
patients in this study reported that their most important needs were 
assurance, proximity and information. The least important needs of these 
family members were comfort and support. The results of this study were 
consistent with previous research. The results of the t-test comparison of 
responses at two different time frames were that there was not a statistically 
significant change in the importance of needs reported by family members over 
time. The responses of the family members regarding whether or not their needs 
were being met demonstrated that needs that ranked as most important were 
being met to a higher degree than the needs that ranked as less important to 
these family members. Additional information obtained from this study was that 
the degree to which the needs were being met for these family members did not 
change significantly over time. This reinforces the concept that the family 
members continued to receive high quality intervention throughout the 
hospitalization. Although it is unrealistic to expect the staff nurse to deal 
with all aspects of family member needs, the knowledge gained from this study 
will assist the nurse in coordinating and prioritizing those interventions for 
the family members.


\\\\\
Effects of Communication Skills Training on Psychosocial Adjustment Among 
Couples Living with Spinal Cord Injury

Constance Captain

Purpose. In this outcome study of programs designed for couples living with 
spinal cord injury (SCI), a communication skills training program was compared 
with an experiential learning program to determine changes in couples' 
interactions and psychosocial adjustment on standardized measurement 
instruments before and after program participation.

Background. The communication project was predicated on the assumption that if 
a couple could learn to communicate more effectively, they may be better able 
to manage the adjustments that arise with SCI.

The need for a program of this type derives from several sources: (1) adapting 
to SCI reaches far beyond adjusting to the physical alterations of injury; (2) 
recent research findings identify marital stability and a positive family 
environment as critical factors in successful rehabilitation outcomes; (3) a 
communication skills approach offers a promising framework as indicated in 
studies with "normal" couples; and (4) limited formal resources necessitate 
the development of intervention programs that optimize existing supports, such 
as the marital relationship.

Subjects. Seventeen couples with a SCI member were randomly assigned to one of 
the two four-week communication programs. The overall attendance rate was 93%. 
Characteristics of the couples were as follows: (1) 88% were married (for two 
couples the partner was a caregiver), (2) 82.4% of persons with SCI were male, 
(3) average length of marriage was 19.5 years (SD=18.85), (4) average age of 
the SCI person was 52 years (SD=15.2), range 19-73 years), and (5) 58.8% of 
persons with SCI were paraplegic.

Findings. Statistical analyses using repeated measures ANOVAs indicated 
significant improvements in communication behaviors among couples in the 
skills-training program. No group differences were found on self-report 
measures of psychosocial adjustment factors. Secondary analysis of SCI persons 
and partners indicated significant improvement in psychosocial adjustment for 
partners, regardless of program assignment. Couples' scores on a coping 
inventory compared favorably with norms established with couples without 
physical disability. The scores on the psychosocial adjustment measure 
indicated poorer adjustment than that noted in populations with breast cancer 
and heart transplant surgery.

Implications. These data indicate the benefits of communication skills 
programs designed for SCI persons and their partners in improving relationship 
skills and assisting couples to adapt to the demands of SCI. Couples work in 
groups promotes networking among couples and is cost effective.


\\\\\
High-Risk Sexual Behavior Communication of Teen Partners

Sharon E. Lock, Stephanie Ferguson, and Carol Wise

The specific aim of this study was to describe how males and females in late 
adolescence communicate with their sexual partners about high-risk sexual 
behaviors. A naturalistic approach was used to describe the communication 
process between male and female sexual partners. Participants were recruited 
from a university in the southeastern U.S. Criteria for inclusion were (1) 
male or female, 18 to 20 years old, (2) never pregnant or fathered a child, 
(3) never married, (4) spoke English, (5) had engaged in sexual intercourse. 
Interviews were designed to elicit information about communication between 
sexual partners about high-risk sexual behavior. Eighteen women and 15 men 
participated in the study. The majority of women (n=13) and men (n=11) were 
Caucasian. Three women were African American and two were Asian American. Four 
men were African American. Mean age was 18.94 years old for women and 19 years 
old for men. Participants were paid $10 after the interview was completed. 
Interviews with women were conducted by either the principal invesigator or a 
trained female research assistant. Interviews with men were conducted by a 
trained male research assistant. Interviews were audiotaped and transcribed 
verbatim by an experienced transcriber.

Constant comparative analysis was used to analyze the transcripts. Male and 
female transcripts were analyzed separately. For both men and women, building 
trust was identified as the core variable for communication about high risk 
sexual behavior. Building trust was defined as the process of developing 
confidence that the sexual partner is truthful about his or her sexual 
history. For women antecendents for building trust were nature of the 
relationship, length of the relationship, and indirect gathering of 
information. For men, antecendetns for building trust were nuture of the 
relationship, length of the relationship, and gut feelings. For women, one 
consequence of building trust was safe sex talk. Women were more likely to 
talk about high risk sexual behavior with their partner if they trusted him. 
For women, safe sex talk was influenced by alcohol use, previous sexual 
experiences, a proactive attitude, knowledge, talking with friends, and the 
media. Another consequence of building trust for women was unsafe sex 
practices. Many women perceived that they wer in a monogamous relationship and 
decided it was safe to not use a condom. For men, the consequences of building 
trust was safe sex talk. For men, safe sex talk was influenced by a passive 
attitude. Men were willing to talk about high risk sexual behavior if the 
woman initiated the conversation, but often did not bring up the topic 
themselves. This study provides an understanding of the context of 
communication about high risk sexual behavior among teen partners. Findings of 
this study can serve as a guide for developing nursing strategies for 
promoting more effective communication about high risk sexual behavior among 
teen partners.


\\\\\
The Role of Interpersonal Communication in the Implementation of HIV-Related 
Sexual Protection

Brenda K. Cobb

Young women are at risk for acquiring disease, such as HIV disease, when 
participating in sexual activities with no protection. The implementation of 
sexual protection often necessitates verbal exchange, either to refuse sexual 
advances from young men or request that they use or allow the use of a condom. 
The purpose of this survey was to invesigate the relationship between 
interpersonal communication and the use of disease-related sexual protective 
practices among heterosexual college women.

Women (N=163), 18 to 22 years of age (mean=18.19) who lived in university 
residence halls, completed the questionnaire. Most wer Caucasian (83%). Almost 
half (49%) of the young women were 16 years of age or younger when they first 
experienced sexual intercourse with a male and 54% have had more than one 
lifetime sexual partner. Respondents were asked to indicate their sexual and 
communication practices with new sexual partners. Eighteen items from the Safe 
Sex Behavior Questionnaire (SSBQ) (DiIorio, Parson, Lehr, & Carlone, 1992) 
were used to measure disease-related sexual protective practices. 
Interpersonal communication was measured with the Information Seeking Scale 
(Kellermann & Reynolds, 1990), Sexual Self-Disclosure Scale (Herold & Way, 
1988) and items from the SSBQ related to communication practices (alpha=.89); 
factor analysis suggested three subscales: General Information Exchange 
(alpha=.85), General Sex Information Communication (alpha=.82), and Sexual 
Safety Information Communication (alpha=.84).

At least 69% of these young women communicated with new sex partners on 
general issues. More detailed discussions of general sexual communication were 
related to the use of contraception (74%), sexual morality (60%) and 
premarital sexual intercourse (58%). Young women frequently sought information 
from new sex partners regarding their sexual history (69%) and previous drug 
use (61%). There was a moderate correlation between the overall measure of 
interpersonal communication and the implementation of disease-related sexual 
protection (r=0.35, p<.001). Young women who communicated more with sexual 
partner(s) implemented more disease-related sexual protective practices. 
Analysis of the interpersonal communication subscales indicated a higher 
correlation between disease-related sexual protection and Sexual Safety 
Information Communication (r=.46, p<.001) than between sexual protective 
practices and General Information Exchange (r=.23, p<.01) and General Sex 
Information (r=.16, p<.04).

Health education programs for young women need to focus on specific sexual 
safety communication practices to enhance their skills in negotiating sexual 
protection. Although general communication practices will likely aid in the 
development of interpersonal understanding in the developing relationship, the 
implementation of sexual protection requires more specific communication.


\\\\\
Influence of Health Perceptions and Hope on Selected Reproductive Health 
Behaviors in Late Adolescent Males

Sara G. Fuller, Terry R. Misener, and Harry F. Sharp III

Health promotion for late adolescent males is a needed but neglected area of 
nursing research. Late adolescent (ages 18-21) is a period of transition from 
family dependence and responsibility to independece and self-responsiblity. 
The reproductive health of young men is of particular importance since they 
are at risk for sexually transmitted diseases, injury, premature parenthood, 
and testicular cnacer: all of whicha re amenable to prevention and early 
detection programs. Using the Kersell/Milsum model of behavioral change, this 
study assessed the influence of general health perception and hope on the 
practice of positive health care practices in men's reproductive health in 
late adolescent males.

Selected at random from the Department of Motor Vehicles roster of licensed 
drivers in a southeastern state, 360 volunteer subjects were stratified by age 
(18-19 & 20-21) with 180 subjects per age grouping. As part of a larger survey 
project, each subject responded to a mailed survey which included Ware's 
General Health Perceptions Scale (GHPS), the Miller Hope Scale (MHS), and the 
Men's Reproductive Health Inventory (MHRI) as well as other instruments. Each 
subject received $25 for participating in the survey.

Findings to be presented include the reliability of the study instruments in 
this population, demographic characteristics of the sample, regression 
analyses of the GHPS and MHS on the MRHI, and the effectiveness of the mailed 
survey with inducement in late adolescent males. Discussion will include 
implications for development of health promotion programs for late adolescent 
males and the use of the Kersell/Milsum model of behavioral change.


\\\\\
Social Cognitive Determinants of Abstinence in College Students

Colleen DiIorio, Sandra Taylor, Joseph Watkins, William Dudley, and Brigitte 
Manteuffel

The specific aim of this study was to determine characteristics which 
distinguish abstinent from nonabstinent college students. Data were collected 
from students at 6 colleges/universities in the Atlanta metropolitan area. 
Names of students were randomly selected from registrar lists, and the 
selected students were sent a questionnaire to complete. Measures were derived 
from social cognitive theory and included knowledge of AIDS and safer sex 
practices, self-efficacy, outcome expectancies, personal goals, perceived 
vulnerability and parental communication. A total of 2,069 students returned 
completed questionnaire. The majority of respondents were female (61.9%); 
49.1% were white, 38.9% black, 6.7% asian, and 5.4% of other ethnic 
backgrounds. There was an approximately equal distribution of freshman, 
sophomores, juniors, and seniors. Preliminary analysis reveals that several 
social cognitive variables including general and sex-based communication with 
parents, self-evaluative outcome expectancies, self-efficacy, alcohol use, and 
perceived vulnerability were instrumental in differentiating sexually active 
from non-sexually active participants. The findings have implications for HIV 
prevention education for college students.


\\\\\
Treatment Decision Making by Parents of Pediatric Oncology Patients

L. Oakes, P. Hinds, W. Furman, C. Kolesar, P. Foppiano, J. Gattuso, M. Olson, 
B. Powell, P. Puckett, A. Quargnenti, G. Simpson, and P. Bozeman

The purpose of this descriptive study was to retrospectively identify parental 
decision making processes surrounding difficult treatment decisions for their 
child. Identification of patterns in parental decision making could provide 
health care professionals with information they could use to better assist 
other parents and each other with making such difficult decisions. These 
identified patterns could become the basis of clinical guidelines for use with 
parents facing difficult care decisions.

A retrospective approach was chosen for this initial work to avoid the 
possibility of the research itself altering decisions that parents might 
currently be making for their child. Parents in our pediatric cancer center 
whose child had died during the previous 6 to 24 months (n=89) were invited to 
participate in the study through a detailed letter that included a response 
sheet on which parents could indicate willingness or refusal to participate in 
the telephone interviews. Two nurses trained in interviewing techniques 
conducted all of the telephone interviews and reviewed and critiqued each 
other's interviews. During the interviews, parents were asked to identify the 
difficult decisions they had to make during their child' care and the factors 
they considered during the decision making. They were also asked to identify 
the actions of health care professionals that assisted or hindered them in 
their decision making. Of the eligible parents, 5 were lost to followup, 38 
agreed to participate, 5 refused, and 36 did not respond. The deceased 
children of the participating parents included 19 males and 19 females whose 
ages raged from 1.5 to 23 years. Demographic information was collected on the 
patients of the parents who declined to participate or who did not respond.

All interviews were tape recorded and transcribed. A semantical content 
analysis was completed with the sampling unit being each parent response and 
the recording unit being a theme. An initial set of theoretically justified, 
mutually exclusive categories was developed and tested by four members of the 
research team on the first two interviews. All subsequent interviews were 
coded independently by four coders, and agreement levels by category ranged 
from 68% to 100%. Six major decisions and 72 influencing factors were 
identified by parents. After applying decision rules developed for the 
analysis, 4 to 7 common factors were identified for each decision. One factor 
that was present in each decision was "Receiving Information from Health Care 
Professionals". Two other common irnluencing factors across decisions were 
"Avoiding Further Suffering for my Child" and "Feeling Supported by and Trust 
for Staff".

Study frndings will provide the basis for a prospective study that will 
include the perspectives of the parents, patients, and health care providers. 
Findings will also contribute to the beginning set of clinical guidelines 
related to the role of the health care professional in parent decision making 
about treatment for their ill child.


\\\\\
Coping with Decision Making by Parents of Children with Cancer: A Secondary 
Analysis of an Existing Qualitative Data Set

Ralph J. Vogel

Parents of children and youths with cancer are asked to make difficult 
treatment-related decisions on behalf of their child. How parents cope with 
their decision making and the outcomes of their decisions may contribute to 
how they later cope with the death of their child. The purpose of this study 
was to examine a existing qualitative data set for ways that parents of now 
deceased children coped with the difficult treatment decisions they made on 
behalf of their child.

The primary study used both quantitative ad qualitative methods 
(semi-structured interviews and a questionnaire) to determine the decisions 
that were most difficult for the parents and what factors they considered in 
their decision making. The interview data from the primary study formed the 
data set for this study which used a secondary analysis as its analytic 
method. In the primary study, 40 parents of 38 deceased patients participated 
in the interviews. Each interview was subsequently coded independently by four 
different members of the research team. In all, eight different coders were 
involved and each reported not coding entire sections of the interviews about 
decision making because those sections were about parental coping with the 
decision making. In the secondary analysis, the original tapes of the 
interviews and line numbered versions of the transcribed tapes were first 
reviewed by a researcher who was not a member of the primary study team. This 
researcher confirmed the impression that parental coping with decision making 
was embedded in the interviews.

The next step involved a conceptual comparison of the major study concept from 
the primary study (decision making) with that of the secondary analysis 
(coping) to determine that the two had shared characteristics. The third step 
consisted of adopting an existing model of coping (Lazarus and Folkman' s 
model) and developing a descriptive table of codes to represent each component 
of the model. This table and three interviews were given to three raters who 
were members of a nursing faculty. The interrater agreement coefficients by 
code and line were consistently less than 50%. Next, two raters involved in 
the primary study were given the table of codes and three interviews to code 
but results again showed inconsistencies by rater and code.

The raters' comments indicated that the coping model did not fit the data. The 
difficulty was determining if that was because of the a) retrospective nature 
of the design (interviewing parents 6 to 24 months after the event may alter 
their recall of the coping process), b) secondary analysis approach (not 
directly inquiring of parents about their coping strategies but gleaning it 
from their interviews), or c) nature of the model. To determine the source of 
the unacceptably low interrater agreement a inductive approach to identify 
parental coping as it exists in the data set was taken. Study findings from 
the secondary analysis will be based on this new approach.


\\\\\
The Possibilities and the Pitfalls of Doing a Secondary Analysis of a 
Qualitative Data Set

Pamela S. Hinds

Secondary analysis is the use of an existing data set to find answers to a 
research question that differs from the question asked in the original or 
primary study. Secondary analyses of quantitative data sets (such as national 
census track surveys) is a respected, common, and cost-effective approach to 
maximizing the usefulness of the collected data (Cherlin, 1991; Gleit & 
Graham, 1989; Lobo, 1986). In contrast, secondary analysis of qualitative data 
sets has not been an accepted approach (Thorne, 1993) because of concerns 
about the appropriateness of qualitative methods and their resulting data for 
such use, including the need for a close relationship between the researcher 
and the data. If these legitimate concerns can be adequately addressed, 
descriptively rich qualitative data sets that will be underutilized could 
become important sources of information.

The major challenges include determining the exact research question that can 
be validly and accurately asked of an existing qualitative data set, assessing 
the quality of the data set, determining and comparing the nature of the 
concepts of interest in the primary and secondary analyses, adequately 
sensitizing the researchers conducting the secondary analysis to the context 
of the primary study, and providing debriefing experiences for researchers 
conducting the secondary analysis.

A major pitfall is the use of research questions that are broad in scope and 
abstract at the conceptual level. Although that kind of research question is 
appropriate for a primary qualitative study, more defined, limited, and 
specified research questions work best in a secondary analysis of a 
qualitative data set. A related pitfall is not first determining what can be 
asked of the data set. Once the research question has been determined, the 
researcher must then assess whether the question is substantial enough to 
merit the efforts of the secondary analysis. Another pitfall is the use of an 
established framework for analytical purposes. Using the established framework 
may contribute to difficult or unsolvable issues about the primary study 
design, method, or the framework itself. Instead, using an inductive, analytic 
approach is more likely to yield reliable and valid findings from a secondary 
analysis. An additional difficulty is the ethical dilemma of using a data set 
for a purpose other than what the participants in the primary study gave 
consent.

The benefits of conducting a secondary analysis of a qualitative data set 
include the opportunities to 1) discover new information about a phenomenon or 
process that might not have resulted from a direct inquiry, and 2) extend or 
validate findings from the primary study. These benefits may be achieved 
without the costs of conducting a labor-intensive, time consuming qualitative 
study.


\\\\\
Responses to Symptoms that Affect Eating During Cancer Treatment

Patricia R. Wilson

Changes in food intake and nutritional status may occur at many points in the 
cancer experience and are of concern to both health professionals and persons 
with cancer. Sources of nutritional changes and persons with cancer who are at 
nutritional risk have been identified. Intervention studies to improve food 
intake for nutritionally at-risk groups have reported mixed results, with some 
improvement in food intake for specific groups, but no improvement in long 
term survival or treatment outcome. An accepted method of improving food 
intake during cancer treatment is the management of symptoms that may affect 
eating. However, few studies have provided a detailed description of specific 
symptoms that affect eating or examined the strategies persons with cancer use 
in response to changes in food intake during cancer treatment. The specific 
aims of this study are to describe symptoms that affect eating during cancer 
treatment, to describe changes in eating that occur during treatment, and to 
describe the responses of persons with cancer to changes in eating. Research 
questions for this descriptive study are: 1) What are the patient identified 
symptoms that affect eating during cancer treatment? 2) To what extent do 
identified symptoms change eating? 3) What are the changes that occur in 
eating? and 4) What are the strategies persons with cancer use in response to 
symptoms that change eating? A convenience sample of consenting subjects 
(n=110) undergoing treatment for cancer of the head and neck, lung, or 
gastrointestinal tract at two regional outpatient oncology centers 
participated in this study. During a semi-structured interview, subjects 
identified symptoms that occurred in the previous 24 hours, rated the extent 
to which each symptom changed eating on a vertical visual analog scale (VAS), 
and answered 3 open-ended questions to describe the changes that occurred in 
eating and the actions taken to change the symptom that affected eating. 
Subjects identified 21 symptoms (average of 5 symptoms/subject; range 0-20) 
that occurred in the previous 24 hours and completed a total of 601 VAS (one 
for each identified symptom) to describe the symptom's effect on eating. 
Symptoms that changed eating the most (VAS average scores > 50) included: 
anorexia, taste changes, nausea, dysphagia, and early satiety. Description of 
ways that the symptoms changed eating included: appetite decreased, stopped 
eating, changes in sensation, quantity and type of food eaten, and changes in 
the eating process, method, and length of time to eat. Subjects described an 
average of one strategy per symptom, (range of 1-5 strategies per symptom). 
The described strategies targeted both the symptom (n=498 strategies) and the 
change in eating (n=269 strategies). This presentation will discuss the 
strategies used for symptoms that changed eating the most. The results from 
this study provide important data on the ways symptoms change eating and the 
strategies actually used to improve eating during cancer treatment. This 
information will assist health professionals in the identification of symptoms 
that affect eating and in the design of effective interventions to manage 
symptoms that affect eating and to improve food intake during cancer 
treatment.


\\\\\
Predictors of Participation in Free Prostate Cancer Screening

Martha S. Tingen and Sally P. Weinrich

Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States 
and the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths among men. The incidence 
of prostate cancer has increased dramatically over the last 10 years by 50%. 
It is estimated that in 1995, there will be 244,000 new cases of prostate 
cancer in the United States. Additionally, estimates of prostate cancer deaths 
will be 40,400.

The purpose of this descriptive, correlational research was to investigate the 
relationship among selected demographic factors and participation in free 
prostate cancer screening. A conceptual map, representing an amalgamation of 
key constructs from multiple models was developed and provided the framework 
for this research. A randomly selected sample of 249 men, ages 40-70, were 
recruited from churches, barbershops and senior centers in a southeastern 
state. Data on demographic factors was obtained using the Prostate Cancer 
Project Questionnalre. Participation in prostate cancer screening was measured 
by complying with the American Cancer Society's Guidelines, which included 
having a digital rectal exam (DRE) and/or a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
blood test. Data analyses included descriptive statistics, correlations, 
chi-square test of independence and logistic regression.

The average participant was African-American, X = 53.7 years, a high school 
graduate and earned between $9,601 to $25,020 per year. Predictors of 
participation in free prostate cancer screening were race, age and income. For 
race, white men, on average, were more likely to participate in free prostate 
cancer screening than African-American men (*p < 0.05). Related to age, older 
men, 60-70 years old, were on average, more likely to participate in free 
prostate cancer screening than younger men (*p < 0.05). Specific to income, 
men whose annual income was > $50,000 were more likely to participate in free 
screening than those who earned between $25,021-$49,999 (*p < 0.05).

Implications of these findings for theoretical and practical perspectives will 
be presented. Additionally, recommendations for future research will be 
identified.

\\\\\
Prostate Cancer Treatment Selection: A Focus Group Exploration

Maureen O'Rourke and Barbara B. Germino

Introduction: Prostate cancer has emerged as a significant health concern in 
the United States, surpassing lung cancer as the most frequently diagnosed 
malignancy in men. The majority of patients present with an incidental finding 
of a prostatic nodule or an elevated PSA during routine physical examination 
or screening. Such patients and their families are unprepared for the 
diagnosis and the subsequent burden of deciding on treatment. The difficulty 
in the decision process is heightened by the lack of scientific evidence to 
support the choice of one treatment option over another. Side effects such as 
incontinence and impotence represent major threats to quality of life, both 
for the patient and his partner. Numerous studies have serendipitously 
uncovered information regarding family participation in the treatment decision 
process, though none have specifically sought to examine their role. 
Traditional approaches to decision making (e.g. rational choice theory) 
prescribe what the rational person ought to do given certain circumstances, 
but fail to describe or explain behavior as it occurs.

Purpose: The purpose of this pilot study was to explore the decision process 
as retrospectively described by prostate cancer patients and their spouses. 
Additionally, the study was executed to test the feasibility of a larger scale 
prospective examination of decision making in this same population.

Specific Aims: The specific aim of this pilot study was not prediction, but to 
inform a deeper understanding of the decision making process.

Methods: Two focus groups were conducted by the researcher. Group sessions 
lasted 90 minutes and were tape recorded with participants' consent. Twelve 
prostate cancer patients and 6 spouses were purposefully recruited from a 
newly organized prostate cancer support group in an urban North Carolina 
community. Participants ranged in age from 51-72 years. Focus group interviews 
were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using content analysis techniques. 
Validity & reliability were systematically addressed using criteria for 
confirmability, dependability, and credibility. An audit trail was established 
with tapes, fieldnotes, and transcripts. The two investigators worked 
independently on samples of coding to check inter-rater reliability. Data were 
grouped into thematic categories.

Results: Seven themes were constituted from the data: 1) Information seeking; 
2) Barriers to be overcome; 3) Making the choice; 4) Whose decision is this? 
5) Issues of physician trust; 6) Expectancy of the diagnosis; and 7) Living 
with the decision. Specific issues raised by subjects included misconceptions 
about the nature and side effects of radiation treatments, symptom 
recognition, and incomplete information about treatment options upon which to 
base their decision, suggesting areas for future research and educational 
intervention.


\\\\\
The Effect of a Relaxation With Guided Imagery Nursing Intervention on Breast 
Cancer Patients' Stress
Suzanne W. Gross

Specific Aims: To test the effect of a nursing intervention employing 
relaxation with guided imagery on perceived stress in a clinical trial with 
breast cancer patients. To describe patient characteristics that promoted or 
inhibited the use of relaxation with guided imagery as a nursing intervention 
with this patient population.

Hypothesis: Women with breast cancer who received standardized cancer care 
instruction and a planned relaxation with guided imagery program (CCI + RGI) 
would exhibit less stress during an eight-week chemotherapy regimen than would 
women who received standardized cancer care instruction (CCI) only.

Subjects: 30 white women predominately from rural Appalachia, age 30 to 67, 
who were naive to chemotherapy and were beginning treatment with combination 
chemotherapy 3 to 8 weeks post surgery for Stage I or Stage II breast cancer.

Methods: A prospective, experimental, repeated measures design was used to 
determine differences in stress levels over 8 weeks' time for women randomized 
to experimental condition of CCI + RGI versus women randomized to control 
condition of CCI only. Patients received RGI and/or CCI throughout the study 
period. RGI was by audio tape authored and recorded by the investigator. CCI, 
from nursing protocols developed for this study, was given weekly as needed 
during scheduled telephone contact with each patient. Measures of stress 
included Cohen's Perceived Stress Scale, Profile of Mood States, and the 
Stanford Inventory of Cancer Patient Adjustment. Baseline measurement and 
initial treatment session were completed prior to the start of day 1, cycle 1 
of chemotherapy. Midpoint and endpoint measurement was done in the fifth and 
ninth weeks, respectively. Data analysis was by repeated measures ANOVA.

Findings: There was a significant Group by Time interaction for the subscale 
Coping with Medical Procedures, F(2,56) = 4.00, p = .02. Patients perceived 
RGI to be of benefit as a help to cope. Reported frequency of RGI use ranged 
from 21 to 112 with a mean of 71. The oldest patients reported less use. The 
most common reasons reported by experimental condition patients for less than 
twice a day use were "too sick to concentrate" and "too busy." Two patients 
reported the cancer ideation contained in the RGI script was threatening.

Implications: RGI by audio tape was a simple nursing intervention easily used 
with this patient population. The findings offer limited support for the 
hypothesis and suggest five areas of future research. Two direct clinical 
application recommendations for improved nursing practice are discussed.


\\\\\
Socialization and Distance Learning Programs

Bonita R. Reinert

According to a recent survey, 135 schools (38%) of the members of AACN 
currently offer some form of distance learning classes. A total of 75 schools 
offer graduate coursework. According to additional findings from that survey, 
the number of graduate distance learning programs have increased of 837% in 
the last ten years. Despite the increased numbers of off-campus graduate 
programs, however, little research has been conducted to study socialization 
in off-campus programs. Since graduate distance learning programs prepare 
future leaders and educators, it is critical that we understand, plan for, and 
evaluate the socialization process. The purpose of this study was to examine 
the concept of socialization from the perspective of schools offering graduate 
distance learning classes.

The study was descriptive in nature. An introductory letter, questionnaire, 
and stamped, self-addressed envelope were mailed to the Deans of AACN member 
schools which offer distance learning graduate courses. The questionnaire used 
in the study was developed by the researcher and consisted of eight open-ended 
questions. Informants were asked to discuss the components of socialization, 
how to facilitate socialization, how to measure the presence of socialization, 
and how to insure socialization occurs in distance learning programs.

Thirty-five schools (45%) returned their questionnaires. Responses for each of 
the questions were examined using content analysis. The framework that guided 
the initial analysis was the Stages of Professional Socialization Model 
developed by Corcoran & Shirley (1988). Preliminary analysis identified the 
following components of socialization: identification with the profession, 
identification of self as an APN, identification with a practice model, and 
adoption of a theoretical and research base for their practice. Categories of 
strategies to facilitate socialization included both formal and informal 
interactions designed to help the student develop an inquiring mind and a 
personal practice model. Eighteen schools (64%) mentioned concerns about 
socialization and distance learning programs. Twelve schools (34%) had 
students come to campus for planned events as a way to address socialization 
needs. Many respondents were unsure how to measure socialization. The most 
common responses included student satisfaction, faculty evaluation, and 
professional behaviors following graduation.

According to Corcoran & Shirley and data from this study, graduate students 
must be exposed to essential resources, as well as informal and formal 
interactions with peers and successful role models to insure profession 
socialization. Those needs are especially difficult to meet when students 
complete entire degrees at off-campus sites. Based on findings from this 
study, more understanding and planning is needed to insure socialization 
occurs in graduate nursing distance learning programs.


\\\\\
Benefits of Enrollment Management for Program Planning, Implementation and 
Marketing

Marilyn B. Chassie

Specific Aims: The purpose of this research was to test the application of 
enrollment management principles to the administration of a graduate program 
in nursing. The presentation will address the concept of enrollment 
management, dimensions of a successful enrollment management program, and 
findings from this research on implementation of a computer-based application 
for enrollment management in a College of Nursing at a major southeastern 
university. Implications of applying enrollment management principles in 
graduate nursing education for student and faculty recruitment, advisement, 
program planning, course scheduling, and program evaluation will be discussed.

Research Questions: What are costs and benefits of implementing a data-based 
system for enrollment management in a graduate program in nursing?

Method: A pre-test, post-test design was applied in this evaluation research. 
Prior to and following implementation of an enrollment management system, data 
pertaining to program inquiries, applications, time from program admission to 
degree completion, faculty/student ratios, and program, course and section 
offerings were collected. Secondary data relative to graduate faculty 
productivity in all academic units of the university were obtained. 
Descriptive statistics, chi-square analyses and t-tests were used to compare 
pre- and post-intervention data, and to compare pre- and post-intervention 
College of Nursing productivity data to similar data from other academic units 
on campus.

Findings: Implementation of an enrollment management program reduced the 
number of courses offered per semester, as well as the number of courses 
scheduled and later canceled due to undersubscription. The average enrollment 
per graduate nursing course increased following implementation of the 
enrollment management system, as did the ratio of students taught per faculty 
member. However, the number of classroom hours per faculty member declined. 
Specific findings related to recruitment, retention, time for degree 
completion, program planning and delivery, and productivity data changes 
relative to other academic units will be discussed.

Conclusions/Implications: Implementation of an effective enrollment management 
program has implications for improved planning, consistent communication, cost 
reduction, and conservation of faculty resources in graduate nursing 
education. Graduate faculty under pressure to teach, maintain advanced 
practice skills, conduct research, and provide community service can benefit 
from a system for managing enrollments to maximize use of their teaching 
talents and duplication of effort. Further, both students and faculty can 
benefit from program planning and advanced schedule projection for courses 
required in various programs of study. Finally, data derived from an 
enrollment management system can be used to target student and faculty 
recruitment efforts and focus the marketing plan of the institution.


\\\\\
Innovation and Excellence: The Army School of Nursing

Nursing was in a state of upheaval when the first world war began. This 
conflict of international proportions created an immediate demand for trained 
nurses to care for civilians at home as well as soldiers at home and abroad. 
Numerous proposals were advanced for solving the problem of supplying nursing 
personnel including increased enrollments in nurse training schools, decreased 
length of training, Red Cross trained nurse's aids, the training of college 
graduates as nurses (Vassar Plan), and an Army School of Nursing (ASN). The 
purpose of this presentation is to describe those factors that influenced the 
development of the Army School of Nursing in 1918, its contributions to 
nursing education, the reasons for its survival long after the war was over, 
and the factors that brought about its abrupt demise.

Proposed by a group of leaders in nursing education, women of exceptional 
education were to be prepared as nurses in army training camps during war. 
Innovative educational approaches were inaugurated and the school quickly 
earned a reputation as an outstanding educational institution. Although the 
school did not meet its original objectives of providing sufficient numbers of 
nurses for the war effort, it was deemed a success because it demonstrated the 
possibility of developing a well-established school and the likelihood of 
rapidly expanding nursing services in an emergency. Unfortunately, the school 
was closed in January 1933 for financial reasons. Implications for nursing 
education and nursing practice will be presented.

Both primary and secondary sources were utilized for this historical research 
study. Primary sources included letters, government documents, school annual 
and an interview with an ASN graduate.


\\\\\
The Effect of Two Teaching Methods on College Nursing Students' Factual 
Knowledge and Performance of Psychomotor Skills

Sue A. Beeson

The purpose of this study was to compare the effect of two teaching methods 
(interactive video and formal lecture/linear video) on college nursing 
students' factual knowledge about blood pressure and their ability to perform 
blood pressure measurement.

With increased emphasis on learning clinical nursing skills before performing 
them in a patient-care setting and the demand on faculty time for teaching 
these skills, the most effective and efficient teaching methods must be 
determined. Interactive video appears to be an exciting and innovative new way 
to teach these skills, but studies have focused mainly on cognitive 
achievement and have produced mixed findings. Some have found that learning of 
cognitive content by interactive video was no different from traditional 
methods, but other studies have found that students scored higher with 
interactive video presentation.

This study used a pretest-posttest analysis of covariance design. College 
nursing students (N=104) with no previous experience in blood pressure 
measurement were randomly assigned to: a formal lecture/linear video teaching 
method or an interactive video teaching method. A 14-item multiple-choice test 
of factual knowledge was administered to both groups immediately before and 
after treatment. A 20-item performance checklist was used to evaluate 
students' ability to perform blood pressure measurement after treatment.

Students taught by the formal lecture/linear video method gained significantly 
more factual knowledge than students taught by interactive video. However, 
there was no significant difference between groups on performance of blood 
pressure measurement.

Results of this study were somewhat unexpected and indicate that faculty 
contact through the formal lecture/linear video method still may be the most 
effective way to teach students facts about skills. Limitations of the study 
must be taken into consideration, but educators should use caution in 
discarding traditional approaches to teaching. Since interactive video was as 
effective as formal lecture on performance of blood pressure measurement, 
possibly combining the two methods would be a logical approach. More studies 
are needed to further investigate effectiveness of new technologies used in 
teaching nursing students, especially in the psychomotor domain.


\\\\\
