Evolution and Evaluation of the Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II

Susan Noble Walker and Diane M. Hill

The Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) was developed to fill the need 
for a reliable and valid measure of health-promoting, as opposed to risk-
reducing, lifestyle behavior (Walker, Sechrist & Pender, 1987). Since its 
introduction, the HPLP has been used in hundred of studies throughout the 
world. Results have confirmed its usefulness with adult populations, but have 
consistently indicated some needs for improvement and further evaluation. To 
insure congruence with teh current state of the science, literature was 
reviewed and experts consulted as a basis for revising existing items and 
generating new items. The revised Health-Promoting Lifestyle Profile II 
(HPLPII) is a 52-item summated rating scale employing a 4-point response 
formate from 1=never to 4=routinely. It measures six dimensions of health-
promoting lifestyle: spiritual growth (9 items), health responsibility (9 
items), physical activity (8 items ), nutrition (9 items), interpersonal 
relations (9 items) and stress management (8 items). Scores are computed for 
the total scale and for each of the six subscales. Construct validity and 
reliability of the HPLPII was assessed in a sample of 712 adults aged 19 to 
92. Confirmatory factor analysis with LISREL supported six factors consistent 
with the dimensions and the loading of the six factors onto a single second 
order latent factor, health-promoting lifestyle. Cronbach's alpha was 0.941 
for the total scale and ranged from 0.792 to 0.871 for the subscales. 
Criterion-related validty was evidenced by moderate correlation with measures 
of health status and quality of life. This enhanced instrument will further 
enable researchers to investigate patterns and determinants of health-
promoting lifestyle, as well as the effects of interventions to alter 
lifestyle.

