Social Support: A Study of Gender Differnces in Multiple Sclerosis Spousal 
Caregivers

Doreen M. Good

The purpose of this study was to determine: a) how male and female multiple 
sclerosis (MS) spousal caregivers describe social networks, satisfaction with 
social support (SS), and perceived social support (PSS), and whether there are 
gender differences in these variables; b) the relationship between PSS of 
caregivers and the functional disability of the person with MS; and c) how PSS 
of MS caregivers relates to age of the caregiver, length of caregiving 
service, and quality of the relationship between caregiver and care recipient 
while controlling for the functional disability of the person with MS. The 
work of Lazarus and Folkman provided the conceptual framework for the study. 
Data were collected from a convenience sample of 28 female and 37 male MS 
spousal caregivers using Brandt and Weinert's Personal Resource Questionnaire 
and Gulick's ADL and Symptom Self Assessment. Questionnaires were distributed 
at meetings such as MS support groups. It was found that female caregivers 
scored significantly higher than males on the total number of resources 
available, PSS, and the perceived availability of friends and selfhelp groups. 
There was a positive relationship between caregiver PSS and the abilty of the 
mate to perform intimate functions. Caregiver PSS was also found to be 
positively correlated with the caregiver's level of commitment to the spouseal 
relationship. Differences in SS between male and female caregivers can be 
considered as a basis for nursing care related to the MS caregiver.

