The Influence of Health Potential on Health Work: A Comparative Study of 
Single-Parent and Two-Parent Families

Marilyn Ford-Gilboe

Studies examining family health promotion processes are alinost non-existent, 
particularly in terms of single-parent families. This study tested a 
proposition deduced from Allen's Developmental Health Model (DHM) that the 
health potential of a family (its strengths, motivation and resources) is 
positively related to degree of health work (health-related problem-solving 
and goal attainment) in a Canadian, sample of 138 single-parent (SPFs) and 
No-parent families (TPFs). The mother and one child (age 10-14) each completed 
mailed self-report instruments used to assess family cohesion (FACES III), 
family pride (Family Strengths Scale), mother's non-traditional sex role 
orientation (FEM Scale), self-efficacy (General Self-Efficacy Scale), internal 
health locus of control (IHLCS), network support (PRQ-85), community support 
(Family Social Support Index) and family income. The dependent variable, 
choice of health options (CHO), was measured by the Health Options Scale 
(HOS). In multiple regression analyses using family scores, the independent 
variables predicted 22-27% of the variance in CHO for the total sample for 
each family type. Backward elimination of variables resulted in three 
different two-variable solutions. Family cohesion was a consistent predictor 
of CHO for the total sample (13%), SPFs (8%) and TPFs (9%). Mothers' SRO 
explained an additional 6% of the variance for the total sample, while general 
self-efficacy and community support accounted for another 8% and 10% of the 
variance for SPFs and TPFs, respectively. Similarities found between SPFs and 
TPFs challenge existing problem-oriented views of SPFs by focusing on their 
potential for engaging in health promotion behavior.

