Evaluation of Pain Assessment in the Elderly Orthopedic Patient

Cynthis Phelan and Ann Patek

This study examined pain assessment in the cognitively intact, elderly 
patient. It explored three specific areas: 1) the role of the elderly person 
in assessing pain; 2) the effectiveness of two different pain scales for 
assessing pain in the elderly; and 3) the impact of pre-operative teaching on 
the patient's participation in pain assessment. 169 patients, 60 and older, 
scheduled for total knee or hip replacement at a 520 bed, mid-west tertiary 
hospital were randomly assigned to one of four treatment groups. All groups 
received routine pre-operative teaching and were assigned to use either the 
Present Pain Intensity scale or the Verbal Analog Scale to measure their pain. 
Two of the study groups received additional pre-operative teaching specific to 
pain assessment. The patient completed a mini-mental status exam prior to 
surgery and 12-24 hours post-operatively. Patients also complete a brief 
questionnaire about pain and the pain assessment scale, 12-24 hours, four days 
and ten days post-operatively. Nursing staff recorded the patient's pain 
rating every four hours and were asked their perception of the patient's pain 
and the patient's ability to understand and use the pain scale. The patient's 
pain was managed as per physician routine. The results of this study indicated 
that the pain scales were equally effective in describing post-operative pain 
in this elderly population. In addition, preoperative instruction on pain 
assessment had no significant impact on patient's participation in pain 
management or level of comfort post-operatively.

