An Invesigation of Non-Noxious Cold as a Pain Intervention Among Women

Barbara D. Manz and Juanita F. Keck

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of peripheral 
stimulation, specifically a non-noxious cold thermal intervention, in the 
reduction of experimental pain. Rationale for the use of peripheral 
stimulation techniques in the reduction of pain comes from the neurophysiology 
of the spinal cord which supports that the firing of non-noxious sensory 
afferents produces active inhibition of neurons transmitting nociceptive 
information through the release of the neurotransmitter enkepbalin. No studies 
have been found that adequately test the effects of a changing cold thermal 
intervention. Because the intervention had not been sufficiently tested to 
allow its use with a clinical population, the study was conducted with 
experimental pain in a non-clinical population. Experimental pain was induced 
through the use of the Submaximal Effort Tourniquet Technique (SETT). A 
convenience samiple of 30 female registered nurses was obtained. Subjects 
served as their own control in a repeated trials design. To control for order 
of presentation, subjects were randomly assigned to the order of the 
intervention. Pain inhibition was measured by a subjective pain numeric rating 
scale and by tolerance time. Meaning of the pain experience was controlled by 
using an experimental pain technique. Past experience with pain and cognitive 
strategy use were measured to assess their potential as confounding variables, 
but were found not significant. Subjects reported a significantly lower pain 
rating for the experimental condition (t=3.44, p=.002). No significant 
difference in tolerance time was detected. The non-noxious cold thermal 
intervention appers to he successful in decreasing experimental pain.

