Hospital Readmissions During Home Care

Mary Ann Anderson, Kathleen S. Hanson, and Nancy DeVilder

More patients are receiving professional home care following hospital 
discharge. Home care is considered to be an integral part of patent recovery. 
Skilled nursing care delivered in the patient's home may prevent, forestall or 
limit costly readmissions to an inpatient setting. Home care professionals 
have long questioned whether the unplanned returns of their clients to 
hospitals are preventable. The literature is replete with information 
concerning readmission from the perspective of the hospital and the physician. 
However, clients' unplanned returns to an inpatient setting while receiving 
home care services has not received much attention, particularly those during 
the crucial initial 31 day service period. The purpose of this study was to 
describe clients who had unplanned returns to a hospital during the first 31 
days of home care service delivery. Using the Hospital Readmission Inventory 
(HRI), an audit tool with previously established validity and reliability, 68 
medical records of clients from 8 midwestern home care agencies were reviewed. 
Patients with an unplanned return were primarily elderly, married females with 
cardiovaseular or respiratory diagnoses. Few of these clients were identpdent 
in making health care decisions or in carig for themselves. Clients were 
readmitted to the hospital after approximately two weeks of home care service, 
because new health problems developed or the primary diagnosis got worse. No 
subjects were readmitted due to a fall in the home or as a result of 
medication difficulties. Characterization of home care clients at high risk 
for hospital readmission may assist in the development of nursing 
interventions aimed at minimizing unplanned returns to the acute care setting.

