Factors that Promote and Inhibit Physical Activity in Cardiac Patients

Bernice C. Yates

Efforts to enhance functioning and well-being in patients with coronary heart 
disease (CHD) have been hampered by the lack of knowledge about factors that 
promote and inhibit physical activity and by the lack of reliable and valid 
measures to assess activity levels. The purpose of this study was: to examine 
barriers and promoters of physical activity and to compare relationships 
between physiologic and self-report measurement of physical activity within a 
health promotion framework. Fifty CHD patients and fifty health volunteers 
were included as subjects. Subjects wore an electronic accelerometer (Caltrac) 
for 24 hours to assess physiologic functioning and also completed standardized 
questionnaires about self-reported activity, symptoms, depression, and self-
efficacy. Moderate correlations were found between physiologic and self-report 
measures of activity (r=.51-.59). Daily activity levels were higher if 
subjects had fewere symptoms (r=-.67), les symptoms distress (r=-.66), and 
more self-efficacy or confidence in their abilities to walk (r=.86) and to do 
general activities (r=.46). Greater self-efficacy to walk and to do general 
activities were the only variables that associated with BOTH physiologic and 
self-report assessment of physical activities suggesting that individuals' 
perceptions of their abilities were important correlates of actual physical 
activity. Knowledge of the barriers and factors that promote exercise will 
guide the development of nursing interventions aimed at improving activity 
levels in cardiac patients.

