The Lay Public's Expectations of the Symptoms of Myocardial Infarction

Julie A. Johnson

During an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) individuals must evaluate their 
symptoms and make decisions about the need to seek treatment. Evidece suggests 
the individuals' prior expectation about the symptoms associated with an AMI 
is associated with the amount of time an individual takes to access the 
emergency medical system, thus influencing the success of available therapies. 
The purpose of this study was to examine the lay public's expectations about 
the location, quality, and intensity of discomfort, and the associated 
symptoms of AMI. A street survey approach was utilized in four Chiago 
neighborhoods. The convenience sample consisted of 197 women and 218 men. 
Subjects were asked to rate how likely they would expect to experience 
particular symptoms during a "heart attack." Chest pain was ranked by 50% of 
teh sample as the most likely sumptom of a heart attack. The other symptoms 
ranked in the top 5 included: palpitations, inability to move, shortness of 
breath, and sweating. Forty-one percent of the subjects ranked the middle of 
the chest as the most likely location for discomfort. Subjects ranked the 
following descriptors of qulaity in the top 5: stabbing, pressure, crushing, 
heaviness, and sharp. Over 88% of subjects expected the intensity to be at 
least a 9 on a scale of 0 to 10. The results of this study indentify accurate 
as well as inaccurate perceptions among the lay public about the symptoms of 
AMI. Subjects are more accurate about the symptoms associated with AMI and 
less accurate about symptoms not associated with AMI.

