A Comparison of the Effectivness of Differing Types and Difficulty of Music 
Activities in Programming for Older Adults with Alzheimer's Disease and 
Related Disorder

Elizabeth A. Swanson, Linda Garand, Kate Gfeller, Natalie Hanson, and George 
Woodworth

The purpose of this study was to compare the effectivness of three different 
types of music activities (movement, rhythm, and singing) presented at two 
levels of difficulty (high demand, low demand) for persons in three difficult 
cognitive states (high, medium and low) of Alzheimer's Disease and other 
related disorders (ADRD). Trained observers, using a time sampling tool, 
documented the quality of participation of 51 persons with ADRD during twelve 
weeks of musiv therapy group sessions in five different treatment settings. 
Quality of participation was documented usign the following 5 categories: high 
response, low response, passive involvement, passive disruption, and active 
disruption. The gratest propration of high response participation by all three 
functional groups occurred during monvement-type activities. The most 
passivity occurred during singing activities. Participants were more 
purposefully involved in rhythmic and singing activities when those activities 
were presented at lower levels of demand. Disruptive behaviors occurred less 
than 10% of the time, but was more frequently observed among eprsons in the 
group with the most cognitive dysfunction.

The research study provides support for the Progressively Lowered Stress 
Threshold model since persons with the most cognitive impairment had more 
difficulty with the high demand music activities and were more successful with 
the low demand music activities.

