Patients' View of Support While Receiving Radiotherapy Treatments for Cancer

Cora Hinds and Alwyn Moyer

This paper will describe how patients with cancer perceive support during 
radiotherapy treatments. Radiation therapy is one of the most effective 
treatmetn modalities used in the control and palliation of cancer. 
Approximately 40 per cent of all newly diagnosed patients with cancer will 
receive radiation treatment, and another 25 per cent of patients living with 
cnacer will require radiation theapy in future (Ontario Ministry of Health, 
1995). The stress associated with the diagnosis of cancer is further 
compounded by the treatment regime. Support is believed to assist patients 
adjust to these stressful experiences. Tape-recorded interviews approximately 
one hour long, were conducted with 12 patients who were receiving radiotherapy 
treatments for cancer. Patients were asked to describe their experiences of 
support while undergoing radiotherapy. Audiotapes were transcribed following 
the procedures and techniques of grounded theory. A tentative model of giving 
and receiving support emerged from the data. Analysis of interview data 
revealed that support is an interpersonal process embedded in an array of 
social exchanges which patients interpret and accept as support. It is multi-
facted and comes in different forms and from different people. The intent or 
meaning of support lies in how it is perceived by the recipient. Support is 
non-patronizing, non-judgemental and unconditional. These findings furhter our 
understanding of concept support and how patients undergoing radiotherapy 
perceive supportive behaviors. Implications for practice will be discussed.

