The Transition to First Position as Nurse Practitioner After Graduation

Norma R. Kelly and Maureen Mathews

The graduate of a Nurse Practitioner (NP) program leaves a comfort zone to 
enter a position where feelings of insecurity and stress are common. Because 
the role continues to evolve and is influenced by many environmental issues, 
the preparation of the NP by the academic institution should be assessed on a 
frequent basis. The purpose of this research was to obtain a better 
understanding of the transitional phase to the first position as nurse 
practitioner after graduation. The perceptions of preparation, expectations, 
gains, losses, and strategies for adjustment were explored. Transition defined 
by Chick and Meleis is a passage from one state to another requiring changes 
in life patterns. During a transition, a feeling of disconnectedness and of 
incongruity between what is occurring and what was expected are common and can 
affect self-concept and role identity. A qualitative approach using focus 
groups was developed. Twenty-one alumni, from one large university, who were 
recent graduates of the NP program participated in one of four focus groups. 
Prolonged engagement, investigator triangulation, peer debriefing, member 
checks, described by Lincoln and Cuba were techniques used to ensure 
credibility. The themes identified were: feelings of isolation; uncertainly 
and difficulty in establishing the NP role; special bonding with clients; 
losses of personal time and privacy with a need for a protective barrier. They 
believed more clinical time; more emphasis on management, including handling 
of conflict; and further instruction on diagnostic tests were needed in 
school. They believed they functioned differently than the physician and found 
it necessary to distance themselves from the role of the nurse, as well as the 
physician. The results have implications on the curriculum of graduate schools 
for NPs.

