The Effect of Social Support on Family Hardiness in Primigravida African-
American Women

Michelle S. Ganchrow Goldstein and C. Covington

Pregnacy is considered by many to be a time of crisis. This may be especially 
true in low socioeconomic level African-American families that have had to 
adapt to the stresses of pregnacy despite low social support. The purpose of 
this study was to examine the relationship between social support and family 
hardiness in primigravida, low socioeconomic status African-American women, 
with hardiness as the outcome measure. Age and socioeconomic status were 
studied as variables affecting social support and family hardiness. This study 
was part of a larger study whose aim was to examine relationships among 
factors immediate to the parent-infant ecology among first-time 
African-American mothers. The Double ABCX Model of Stress and Adaptation 
(McCubbin ad Patterson, 1983) was used to guide this study. The data from the 
subjects was collected from a demographic instrument, the Social Support 
Index, and the Family Hardiness Index. The number of subjects who were 
involved in this study was N=70. Hierarchical linear regression was used to 
determine whether social support (SS) served as a predictor of family 
hardiness (FH), with socioeconomic statas (SES) ad age used as control 
variables. The results showed that SES, age and SS, entered as a model did not 
predict FH. However, SS directly accounted for 18% of the variace in FH 
indicating a strong relationship between those two variables (p=.0162). 
Further studies are needed with women who are in a higher socioeconomic status 
and/or who are in a wider age range to determine whether changes of these 
factors will affect their influence on social support as a predictor of family 
hardiness.

