Relaxation Pattern Manifestations of Lamaze-Trained Pregnant Women Listening 
to Music and Environmental Sound Tapes-Qualitative Results

Nancy Wiand

The purpose of this study was to examine relaxation pattern manfestations in 
Lamaze-trained pregnant women listening to Baroque music, New Age music, and 
an environmental ocean sound tape, Rogers' Science of Unitary Human Beings 
provided the theoretical framework. A questionnaire was used with 36 subjects 
to identify their mental images during listening to the three music/sound 
interventions. Content analysis was performed on questionnaire responses and 
inspection of biofeedback graphs. This process revealed that in response to 
the music/ocean sound tip subjects experienced either (1) relaxing effects, 
(2) stimulating effects, (3) negative effects, and, in some cases, (4) effects 
from previous music training. Some of the most interesting responses included 
one subject who hid been sexually-abused by an uncle near the ocean for four 
years who demonstrated marked tension in response to the ocean sounds and good 
relaxation in response to the music. One subject with seven years of violin 
training had marked tension in response to Pachelbel's Canon in D due to 
thinking about how difficult it would be to perform this piece; she was also 
afraid of water, so demonstrated increased tension in response to the ocean 
sounds, but good relaxation in response to Spectrum Suite. There are a number 
of implications for nurses wanting to use music therapeutically with clients 
including individualizing music for clients after assessing their previous 
experience with music and environmental sounds.

