Determinants of Cognitive Function of Elderly Patients Upon Hospitalization

Marquis D. Foreman and C. Bourgiugnon

The spcific aim of this project is to test a longitudinal causal model 
describing the evolutionary processes of acute confusion across the trajectory 
of hospitalization for acute illness in older adults. The analysis discussed 
here is from the first 24-hour period of hospitalization. The sample consists 
of 310 elderly patients admitted for the treatment of various medical, as 
opposed to surgical, health problems. The subjects range in age from 65 to 99 
years, with a mean age of 73.03 years, and are predominately female 67% 
(n=209), and African-American (n=197 or 64%). Multiple measures of cognitive 
function and dysfunction were obtained, including the MMSE, CAC-A, A-test, 
Digit Span, CAM, VAS-C, and GDS. Psychophysiologic determinants of cognitive 
function and dysfunction were obtained daily and categorized within Levine's 
Conservation Model of Nursing: the conservation of energy, and structural, 
personal, and social integrity. Using LISREL, a poor data-model fit was 
obtained when testing the proposed model with five latent variables cognition, 
and energy, and structural, personal, and social integrity. The observed 
variables that should hav eloaded on the latent variable of personal and 
social integrity seemed to fit with the latent variable of cognition. The 
final model had good data-model fit with three latent variables of cognition, 
energy, and structure. The Chi-square = 108.24, df = 87, p =0.061, the GFI = 
0.936, and the AGFI = 0.912. Thus, upon admission to the hospital it would 
seem the energy and structural integrity are the primary determinants of 
cognitive function of elderly patients.

