The Effect of Strength or Balance Exercises Upon the Health Care Utilization 
of Older Adults

Robert Topp, Nancy Dayhoff, and Joy Suhrheinrich

The purpose of this study was to track the health care utilization of older 
adults involved in either strength training, balance training, or control 
activities for a four month period of time. One-hundred-and-forty-two 
community dwelling older adults (X age = 73.1 + 6.7 years), who had no 
contraindications to regular exercise were randomized into one of three 
groups. The 55 individuals in the strength training group participated in a 
strength training of all major muscle groups using elastic bands (Topp, et 
al., 1994) three times per week for four months. The 53 individuals in the 
balance training group participated in a balance training program (Dayhoff, 
unpublished; Perkins-Carpenter, 1991) three times per week for four months. 
The remaining 34 individuals were assigned to a control group activity. All 
subjects kept monthly diaries of their health care utilization during the four 
month study. 89% (n=122 patient months) of the control group, 90% (n=191 
patient months) of the balance training group, and 90% (n=198 patient months) 
of the strength training group returned their diaries. The control group 
reported significantly more health care visits (F=4.2, p<.016), then either 
the strength or balance training groups. The control group also reported 
significantly more physician, and nonphysician visits than the balance and 
strength training groups respectively. These findings need to be interpreted 
cautiously, but seem to indicate that exercise may impact the health care 
utilization of older adults.

