Life as Experienced by Women in Their Sixties: A Phenomenological Study

Carolyn W. DeVore

This descriptive, exploratory study explicates the strengths of women in their 
sixties as 12 women describe their lived experience. The meaning of life as 
experienced by these women was derived through a Husserlian phenomenologic 
research method. Ten patterns of life experience were identified across these 
women's stories of their life-world. These women spoke of (1) maintaining 
connectedness with others, (2) becoming strong through unexpected loss, and 3) 
gaining perspective on life by weaving past, present, and future into meaning. 
They told of (4) realizing that you are what you are because of the journey 
that you have traveled, (5) feeling free to do what they want, and (6) 
adjusting to and putting into perspective the physical changes experienced due 
to aging. Study participants (7) recognized the contrast of enduring qualities 
and changes within themselves. They described (8) wanting to do more than they 
were able to, or had time for. These women were future oriented, (9) 
anticipating possibilities for their own future while (10) experiencing caring 
concern for the future of others. Comparison of phenomenological themes with 
the literature contributes knowledge to dispel stereotypes about aging and 
women by illuminating the strengths and wisdom of women in their sixties. 
Patterns of life experience identifiable across their narrative descriptions 
of life provide foundational information for development of theoretical 
conceptualizations on womens health and well-being during the transitional 
life phase of the sixties.

