Cervial Cancer Screening Among Chinese and Non-Asian Women

Jane Z-Y Lu

While Asians are the fastest growing ethnic minorities in the U.S., baseline 
data on health behaviors of this group are lacking. The purpose of this study 
was to identify barriers to Pap smear screening in Chinese compared to 
non-Asian women. The questionnaire, based on the Health Belief Model, includes 
variables of perceived susceptibility, seriousness, barriers, efficacy of 
cervical cancer screening and variables on health care utilization. In 
addition to 150 Chinese respondents, 16 African-Americans and one Hispanic 
were randomly selected from a midwest university. Among 71 (43%) Chinese and 
149 (99.3%) non-Asians who had a Pap smear previously, respectively 53.5% and 
81.2% (p<.001) received physical examinations in the past year, and 67.2% vs. 
92.5% (p<.05) had been advised about Pap smears by a health provider. The 
duration since the last Pap test between Chinese and non-Asians was not 
significantly different. The scores of perceived susceptibility and perceived 
comfort were significantly different between these two groups (p<.005), 
whereas the differences were not significant in the scores of perceived 
seriousness and general efficacy of Pap tests. Logistic Regression showed that 
only perceived comfort significantly accounted for 38.8% of variance on the 
acceptance of a Pap test among Chinese women. Factors that facilitate or 
impede the participation in the Pap smear screening program are culturally 
specific and the understanding of them is essential to deliver culturally 
sensitive care.

