Health Perceptions and Behaviors Among Two Generations of Southern Black 
Families

J. Armer and T. Tripp-Reimer

The experience of health among vulnerable ethnic minority groups in America 
may differ widely from that of the general population. As part of a research 
project focusing on health and well-being among three generations of 
ethnically-diverse community-dwelling adults, 180 community-dwelling 
African-American respondents in a southern state were invited to define what 
being healthy meant to them and to list activities aimed at promoting and 
protecting their own health. Content analysis of responses to the open-ended 
questions was carried out, with sorting by themes into categories. The unit of 
analysis was the complete thought. The analyses of both the definition of 
health and the self-reported health maintenance behaviors of these respondents 
support the notion of a multidimensional concept of health. Mental, physical, 
psychological, and spiritual components of health and health behaviors were 
cited. Qualitative findings were compared and contrasted to responses to the 
quantitative measure of the Health Promoting Lifestyle Profile (HPLP) (Pender, 
1987), where the nutrition subscale raked third highest and the exercise 
subscale ranked lowest of six subscales. Among the Black respondents, the 
self-actualization HPLP subscale score ranked highest, a finding unique to 
this ethnic group. Perceived family social support was reported higher than 
perceived social support from friends. Overall findings were relatively stable 
among respondents above and below age 60. These research findings increase 
understanding of health-promoting and health-maintaining behaviors among 
vulnerable populations. It is important that health professionals recognize 
and respond with culturally-appropriate research-based interventions to the 
unique health-related perspectives and behaviors of ethnically-diverse elders 
and families.

