Tricks of the Trade for Managing Childhood Illness: Parents' Reports of Their 
Ad Hoc Management Strategies

Agatha Gallo, K. Knafl, B. Breitmayer, and L. Zoeller

Parents of children with chronic illness are expected to assume an active role 
in managing their child's illness. Much of the research on the role of parents 
in illness management has focused on parents' and children's adherence to the 
treatment regimen. However, illness management typically entails much more 
than treatment adherence as parents devise ways to accommodate family life to 
the demands of illness. The purpose of this paper is to expand our 
understanding of how paints develop and use "tricks of the trade" to manage 
their children's chronic illness by specifying those areas in which parents 
develop ad hoc strategies, describing the nature of such strategies, 
identifying the role of providers in developing ad hoc strategies, and 
exploring differences in ad hoc strategies across varying illness and family 
situations. Data come from interviews with parents in 59 families (58 mothers, 
49 fathers) who responded to open ended questions about the extent to which 
they relied on input from health care professionals or their own 
experientially based knowledge to manage their child's chronic illness. Data 
analysis drew on established qualitative techniques (Miles & Huberman, 1993) 
and revealed considerable variation in the extent to which parents used ad hoc 
management strategies and the contributions of professionals to the 
development of such strategies. Findings are discussed in terms of the need to 
refine further the concept of ad hoc management strategies as an important 
aspect of family response to childhood chronic illness and their implications 
for establishing positive working relationships between parents and health 
care professionals.

