Implementation and Testing of a Smoking Cessation Program for Urban Pregnant 
Latinas

Pamela K. Pletsch

Cigarette smoking is an important modifiable risk factor, yet the Healthy 
People 2000 objectives remain unmet for pregnant Latinas. The goals for this 
research were to implement and test "Smoke Free Madres," an 
investigator-designed 3-session smoking cessation intervention based on 
Bandura's Social Cognitive Theory and tailored for pregnant Latinas. Focus 
group discussions with members of the target population preceded 
implementation and allowed for refinement. The first Smoke Free Madres session 
focuses on consciousness-raising, establishing social support, and stress 
management; the second on preparing to quit; and the third on maintenance and 
relapse prevention. A sample of 17 urban pregnant Latina smokers between the 
ages of 14 and 24 participated in the intervention. A quasi-experimental 
pre-test, post-test, with follow-up design was used with the experimental 
group participating in the 3-session Smoke Free Madres program and the 
treatment control group participating in an 8-session standard program. 
Smoking status and self-efficacy for smoking abstinence were measured pre and 
post intervention and at follow-up. At follow-up, 60% of each group had quit 
or significantly reduced the number of cigarettes smoked. Study quit rates 
were high compared to other programs. Smoke Free Madres, the less intensive, 
3-session tailored intervention was as effective as the longer 8-session 
generic smoking cessation program. Results are discussed as they illuminate 
the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of interventions in 
research with vulnerable populations of urban women.
