Laying the Empirical Groundwork for Intervention Research with Women who have 
Alcohol Problems and Histories of Childhood Sexual Abuse

Joanne M. Hall

An ethnographic study was undertaken in the Milwaukee, WI area to lay the 
empirical groundwork for intervention research targeted to women who have 
alcohol problems and histories of childhood sexual abuse. The purposes of the 
study were to: (a) explore the health needs of these women and their access to 
resources and services, (b) evaluate existing community resources and services 
for women who are dually affected by alcohol problems and histories of 
childhood sexual abuse, and (c) establish links with members of appropriate 
community-based organizations who can collaborate in designing intervention 
research to improve services for this at-risk group. Data collection involved 
ethnographic interviews with 20 women who have alcohol problems and histories 
of childhood sexual abuse, community assessment of local alcohol and sexual 
abuse-related health and social services, and analysis of policies and 
relevant public records. Recruitment of ethnic/racial minority and low-income 
women were emphasized. These qualitative data were analyzed using ethnographic 
coding, narrative analysis, and matrix analysis. In the process of the 
research, collaborative links with the community were established via 
extensive outreach efforts. The major goal of these activities is the design 
of interventions that have local meaning and utility. Results are discussed as 
they illuminate the design, implementation, testing, and evaluation of 
interventions in research with vulnerable populations of urban women.

