Process and Outcome Evaluation of Community Invervention Research to Prevent 
HIV Among Women at Risk

Patricia E. Stevens

The authors report on the processes and outcomes of intervention research to 
prevent HIV among women. The project was implemented over two years and took 
place in community settings, utilizing peers to collect ethnographic data, 
disseminate HIV prevention information, provide emotional support, and model 
skills necessary for behavior change. A cadre of peer educators, who were also 
trained as indigenous ethnographic researchers, conducted interviews about HIV 
risk-taking with a racially diverse sample of 1189 women in bars, dance clubs, 
and at community events, offering individually tailored HIV prevention 
education to each participant. They also produced 55 group educational 
presentations designed to raise consciousness about HIV prevention, 
demonstrate safer sex strategies, and role-model risk reduction, with a total 
of 3665 women in attendance. Key process evaluation findings suggest that the 
project's combined individual and group approach and its continuity over time 
were particularly well-matched to the needs of the target population. The 
outcome evaluation indicates that the project positively affected 
participants' intent to change risk behaviors, supported incremental changes 
to reduce risk, assisted participants in the interpersonal realm of partner 
negotiations, and began to change community conventions about sexual 
expectations and practices. Results are discussed as they illuminate the 
design, implementation testing, and evaluation of interventions in research 
with vulnerable populations of urban women.

