Tailoring an Effectiveness Trial of a Psychoeducational Intervention for Trhee 
Ethnically Diverse Groups: American Indian, Hispanic, and African American 
Working Women

Linda Napholz

The primary purpose of this study was to determine the effectiveness of a 
six-session group psychoeducational intervention in reducing role conflict and 
depression, and increasing instrumentality, self-esteem, and life satisfaction 
among minority working women: one group American Indian (n=8), one group 
Hispanic (n=9), and two groups African American (n=7, n=9). The design of the 
intervention used traditional coping strategies as well as cognitive 
behavioral methods to enhance psychological well-being through education, 
problem identification, and problem solving. The secondary purposes of the 
study were to: (a) understand the lived experience of role conflict among 
minority working women and (b) refine the psychoeducational intervention in 
preparation for larger scale testing among culturally diverse groups. A 
triangulated method was used, combining both quantitative and qualitative 
methods. The quantitative portion of the study was based on a one-group 
pretest-posttest follow-up design, utilizing well-tested instruments to 
measure study variables. Analysis of qualitative data from the content of 
groups allowed the investigator to describe in depth the phenomena of role 
conflict, instrumentality, and indices of psychological well-being for 
American Indian, Hispanic, and African American working women. The use of 
qualitative methods also proved essential in tailoring the intervention to 
each ethnic group, making it meaningful and culturally relevant. Results are 
discussed as they illuminate the design, implementation, testing, and 
evaluation of interventions in research with vulnerable populations of urban 
women.

