Assessment of Critical Thinking Skills and Dispositions of Registered Nurses

Jullette C. Mitre

The National League of Nursing mandated that nursing programs document the 
outcomes of critical thinking in their graduates (NLN, 1991). The purpose of 
this pilot study was to assess and obtain information regarding the 
feasibility of administering the California Critical Thinking Skills Test 
(CCTST), California Critical Thinking Dispositions Inventory (CCTDI), and an 
investigator developed, Supervisor/Self Rating scale and Demographic Data. 
Information Processing Theory with the application of Richard Paul (1993) and 
Peter Facione's (1992) concepts of the cognitive and affective domains of 
critical thinking provide the framework for this study. A volunteer sample of 
eight RNs employed at a rural Midwestern hospital and their supervisors (N=6) 
were the subjects of the study. Descriptive data of the CCTST and CCTDI total 
test score results, each test's subscore results, supervisor and self ratings 
results and demographic data are reported. Preliminary findings indicate that 
testing time and tracking of multiple forms is lengthy and unwieldy. Test 
score results fell into a normal curve (range of 7-28 points). Subjects with 
lower skills scores tended to have higher dispositions scores and vice versa. 
Overall supervisor ratings tended to be slightly higher than the RN self 
evaluation ratings for those RNs with higher skills test scores and vice 
versa. Despite the limitations of the pilot study, data results provide 
information about the critical thinking skills and dispositions of the RN, 
neither of which have been found in the literature. Several avenues for 
further research are implicated by this pilot study.

