Midwest Baccalaureate Nursing Educatin Curricular Changes in Response to 
Health Care Reform

Georgia Urban, Terry Wood, Maryellen McSweeney, and Sandy Lindquist

The purpose of this cross-sectional research study was to describe how 
baccalaureate nursing curricula are being designed for preparing graduates to 
function in the changing health care delivery system. The sample was 137 NLN 
accredited generic baccalaureate nursing programs in the midwest region of the 
United States. Data were collected by means of a mailed survey to curriculum 
chairpersons. Eighty-three questionnaires were returned for a response rate of 
60%. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics including percentage 
distributions and measures of central tendency. Data indicated that major 
documents influencing curricular changes were Healthy People 2000 (69.9%) and 
Nursing's Agenda for Health Care Reform (63.9%). Other documents influencing 
change include Healthy America: Practitioners for 2005-PEW Commission (37.3%). 
Results reflected predominant utilization of community based clinical settings 
with the majority of the programs using the following clinical sites: 
community/public health settings (100%), home health agencies (96.4%), 
ambulatory care (92.8%), extended care facilities (90.4%), and school health 
(85.5%). Hospital acute care settings were used by 98% of the programs along 
with hospital rehabilitation care (78.3%) and the hospital emergency room 
(78.3%). In regard to potential for violence in hospital settings and the 
community, 84% reported that they have not altered clinical placement of 
students. Implications of this study include that there is strong movement 
towards utilizing a variety of community based clinical sites. Findings may be 
beneficial to faculty in curricular development and revision.

