Nurse Educators' Perception of Critical Thinking

Joanne M. Gordon

Dialog is faciliatated when a common understanding of words exists. This 
descriptive study demonstrated that nurse educators and non-nurse experts 
conceptualize critical thinking differently. A review of the literature points 
out conflicting views among nurse educators regarding their perception of 
critical thinking. Some perceived critical thinking as analogous to the 
nursing process, while others defined critical thinking as an abstract 
thinking process. This study compared and contrasted nurse educators' 
perception of critical thinking with the perception held by 46 critical 
thinking experts from disciplines unrelated to the health sciences. A cluster 
sampling technique was use. An investigator-developed Critical Thinking Survey 
was randomly distributed to 415 faculty in 83 baccalaureate nursing programs 
in the Midwest, with a return rate of 61 percent. This study found that nurse 
educators perceived critical thinking as a rational, linear process congruent 
with the nursing process, decision making, diagnostic reasoning, and the 
research process. Chi-square Goodness of Fit analyses found statistically 
significant differences (p<0.01) between critical thinking experts' and nurse 
educators' perception of critical thinking, in other disciplines, it is 
evident that nurse educators' view of critical thinking is not congruent with 
the view of non-nurse experts. This study suggests that practice disciplines 
such as nursing may perceive critical thinking differently than non-practice 
disciplines.

