Methodological Issues in Theoretical Triangulation: An Example Testing Two 
Self Care Theories

Linda S. Baas

Theoretical triangulation is an infrequently used method to test two or more 
competing theories using the same data set. This method is pertinent to 
nursing science as the discipline continues to build a theoretical foundation 
for practice. Theories that pertain to a similar concept and are at the same 
predictive or prescriptive level are appropriate competitors for 
triangulation. To conduct such a study, the investigator must apply accepted 
criteria for testing theory and use instruments that are congruent with the 
concept of interest as well as the theory. These requirements a pose dilemmas 
for the investigator that necessitates unique strategies to conduct such a 
study. To illustrate this triangulation technique, an example will be 
presented that demonstrates testing two theories of self care. Specifically, 
Orem's Self Care Deficit Theory and Erickson, Tomlin, and Swain's Modeling and 
Role Modeling (MRM) Paradigm were tested. The first theory focuses on the 
client's deficits, while the second theory focuses on the client's perception 
of resources that are available as well as needed for recovery. The Self Care 
Resource Inventory was completed by 84 persons with a diagnosis of myocardial 
infarction and 38 with heart failure. The Index of Well Being was used as an 
outcome measure. Results demonstrated the strength of Modeling and Role 
Modeling to account for a greater proportion of the variance in the outcome 
measures of self care.

