Health Motivation, Health Behavior, and Health Status in Adolescents with 
Diabetes Mellitus

Maureen A. Frey and Vicki R. Voskuil

For adolescents in specialty care, the emphasis is often on illness and its 
management rather than health promotion. In order to learn more about health, 
we investigated the relationship among health motivation, general health 
behavior, and health status in 77 youths between the ages of 11-18 with 
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). King's systems (1981) framework 
and Deci's (1975, 1980) cognitive evaluation theory provided the theoretical 
framework for the descriptive, correlational study. Health motivation was 
measured by the Health Self-Determinism Index for Children (Cox et al., 1990). 
Health behavior was measured by the Denyes Self-Care Practices Instrument 
(Denyes, 1980). There were three indicators of health: functional, 
physical/mental, and perception of health status, measured by the 
Self-Perception Profile for Children (Harter, 1985), Brief Symptom Inventory 
(Derogatis & Melisaratos, 1983), and a single item rating scale, respectively. 
Results showed that intrinsic health motivation was related to health behavior 
(r=.43, p<.001) but extrinsic motivation was not. Health motivation was also 
related to both functional (r=.28, p<.05) and perceived (r=.24, p<.05) health 
status. Regression analysis showed that health behavior explained 19% of the 
variance in functional health status (F=8.2, p<.001) and 41% of the variance 
in perceived health status (F=24.6, p<.0001). Health motivation was not a 
significant predictor of any health outcome. Results indicate that health 
motivation has a direct effect on health outcome while the influence of health 
motivation is most likely indirect. Because of the overlap between general 
health behavior and diabetes care, (i.e., nutrition, exercise) intervention 
that include both all likely to improve health status and possibly illness 
control as well.

