Knowledge, Beliefs, and Behavior of Colorectal and Prostate Cancer Screening 
Among Korean Americans

Katherine Kim, R. A. Brintnall, E. Yu, Y. Kean, E. Chen, J. Kim, and W. Liu

Cancer continues to pose a significant health threat to American men and 
women. Early detection and screening provides a vital opportunity to reduce 
mortality, maximize treatment outcomes, and improve survival. While national 
surveys, such as the 1987 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) Cancer 
Control Supplement, have examined cancer screening practices by adults in the 
United States, these studies do not include Asian Americans. The purpose of 
this study was to examine colorectal and prostate cancer screening knowledge, 
beliefs and behavior among Korean Americans. The sample consisted of 104 
Korean American men and 159 women, 40 to 69 years of age, living in Chicago 
area. The NHIS Cancer Control Supplement questionnaire was used to collect 
data. We translated the questionnaire to Korean using the NCHS's QDRL method 
to develop a culturally sensitive instrument. Percentages of subjects aware of 
digital rectal exam, blood stool test, and proctoscopy were 29%, 50%, and 20% 
respectively. Percentage of subjects having ever had digital rectal exam, 
blood stool test and proctoscopy were only 12, 10%, and 2% respectively. 
Factors associated with the use of colorectal and prostate cancer screening by 
the subjects were also examined. The findings indicate that majority of 
subjects aware of screening examinations forego the tests due to 
underestimating their importance; in fact, 87 to 90% of this group reported 
that not having symptoms or problems were the major reasons for not having had 
colorectal and prostate cancer screening. Implications of findings for health 
professionals will be discussed.

