Redefining Smoking and the Self as a Nonsmoker: A Study of Smoking Cessation 
in Older Adults

Janet M. Brown

There is an overwhelming amount of literature available about the detrimental 
effect of smoking upon health. Consequently, there is an expanded interest in 
development of theoretically based smoking cessation programs. However, too 
little attention is being given to smoking cessation in the elderly and few 
studies relating the experiences of older adults who have quit smoking have 
been reported. The purpose of this study was to develop a substantive theory 
which would facilitate a better understanding of the subjective experiences of 
older adults who quit smoking. Semi-structured interviews were conducted. The 
sample consisted of 21 older adults with a mean age of 67 years who had quit 
smoking for a minimum of 3 months and a maximum of 5 years prior to being 
interviewed. Verbatim transcripts of the interviews were analyzed using the 
constant comparative method. Data analysis yielded a core variable, redefining 
smoking and the self as a nonsmoker which was indicated by the major 
theoretical categories of recognizing the need to quit, making the decision, 
learning to be a nonsmoker, and sustaining as a nonsmoker. Findings support 
that older adults who quit smoking progress through stages. Their experiences 
are consistent with the developmental tasks of older adulthood. Nurses and 
other health care providers can assist older adults in the process of 
redefining smoking and themselves as nonsmokers by implementing stage specific 
interventions and strategies that promote the redefining process. Findings 
also have implication for public policy development.
