Walking for Exercise Self-Efficacy Appraisal

Donna B. Konradi

Correlations between behavior specific self-efficacy measures and 
health-related behavior have been noted, however, studies to evaluate the 
relationship between age and behavior specific self-efficacy appraisals are 
needed. The study purposes were as follows: to describe the factors included 
in a walking for exercise self-efficacy appraisal process; to compare the 
self-efficacy appraisal factors described by walkers under 65 with self-
efficacy appraisal factors described by walkers 65 and older; and to describe 
the walking for exercise routines followed by participants. A total of 44 
adults currently participating in a walking for exercise program each 
participated in a 90 minute focus group discussion session. Seven group 
discussion sessions were held (3 sessions were attended by walkers younger 
than 65 and 4 sessions were attended by walkers 65 and older). Walkers were 
recruited for participation using newspaper advertisements; interviews with 
radio personalities; public service radio announcements; recruitment at the 
shopping mall; and recruitment at a "Fit and Fifty" exercise class. Group 
discussions were recorded and transcribed to identify common themes. One 
striking self-efficacy appraisal group difference concerned the "making time 
to exercise" factor. Finding the time to exercise was a significant problem 
for persons in the under 65 group, however persons 65 and over often remarked 
that time was not a concern. Walkers 65 and over did not identify health 
concerns to be a barrier to walking for exercise adherence with any greater 
frequency than walkers younger than 65. Development of two age specific 
(younger than 65 and 65 and older) "Walking for Exercise Self-Efficacy" 
Instruments is planned.

