New Incremental Threshold Loading (ITL) Test of Respiratory Muscle Endurance 
(RME): Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)

Janet L. Larson, Margaret Covey, Jean Berry, Scott Wirtz, and Miyoko Matsuo

Patients with CoPD experience deterioration in respiratory muscle function, 
but effects on RME are not well established because there are no definitive 
tests of RME for patients with COPD. This study examined reliability and 
validity of a new ITL test of RME. Each stage consisted of two minutes of 
loaded breathing followed by one minute of unloaded breathing to reduce 
dyspnea and minimize its confounding effects. At stage one patients breathed 
against an inspiratory threshold load equal to 30% of maximal inspiratory 
pressure (PImax) and the load was increased by one 50 gm weight at each stage, 
continuing to the limits of endurance. The test was repeated three times at 
one week intervals. The sample included 45 patients with COPD (mean(SD)): age, 
66 (7) yrs. and forced expiratory volume in 1 second, 38 (17) % predicted. 
Repeated measures ANOVA revealed tests 1 and 2 were significantly different 
(p<.01), but tests 2 and 3 were not significantly different. For tests 1, 2, 
and 3 the mean (SD) final stage was 316 (135) gms, 354 (133) gms, 367 (139) 
gms, and rating of perceived breathlessness (Borg scale) an the end of the 
test was 6.5 (3.0), 7.1 (2.7), 7.1 (2.7), respectively. Test-retest 
reliability was r12-.90 and 423-.89. Differences between test 1 and 2 were < 
one stage for 71% and < two stages for 93% of subjects. Differences between 
test 2 and 3 were < one stage for 80% and < two stages for 93% of subjects. 
Validity of the new ITL was supported by a decline in PImax measured 
immediately after the end of the ITL test, suggesting that patients continued 
to the limits of their endurance as evidenced by fatigue of the inspiratory 
muscles. The new ITL test was reliable and preliminary evidence of its 
validity was established.

