The Fine Art of Caring: Analysis of Students' Papers Relating Fine Arts and 
Nursing

Beatrice B. Turkoski

Upper division nursing students are well aware of increasingly complex science 
of nursing. The exercise described in this paper was designed to add a new 
dimension to upper division students' perception of nursing as art; to develop 
and strengthen their understanding of nursing as a part of the broader picture 
of humanity and human endeavor. Students in Concepts class are asked to 
identify a work of art-a piece of music, painting, sculpture, poetry-of their 
choice that has a relationship to how their concept of nursing. They are asked 
to articulate their feelings in writing, and to share with the class the 
connections they have made. Analyses of randomly selected papers (N=140) 
identified that the symbolic connections students made to specific works of 
art or music addressed eight major themes. The primary theme was nursing as 
caring; other themes included: nursing as mothering, nursing as a process, 
nursing as color, nursing as spiritual, nursing as helping, and nursing as 
strength. Each theme is discussed with illustrations of the words of the 
students' as they explain how nursing is related to a particular piece of fine 
art. A survey of students six months and one year after the assignment 
indicates that more than 70% of students remembered the piece of art they had 
chosen and considered this a worthwhile use of their time. They were more 
aware of nursing as more than science and more than art-they began to see 
nursing ..."in a different light, as more meaningful in the whole scheme of 
things." This study illustrates one method of helping students to relate their 
humanities studies and their scientific studies to their professional nursing 
role. The study further illustrate that students do remember those exercises 
and experiences that they see as valuable.

