Stresses and Challenges of Clinical Experience Among ADN and BSN Students

Marilyn H. Oermann

Limited research is available as to the stresses and challenges of clinical 
experience among nursing students, and no studies have compared student 
perceptions of their clinical practice in ADN and BSN programs. This study 
examined the stresses and challenges of clinical experience and identified 
factors that inhibited and facilitated learning in the practice setting. 
Students (N=461) from a random sample of ten ADN and BSN programs throughout 
the midwest completed the Clinical Stress Questionnaire. Although students 
were moderately stressed in clinical practice, they were challenged by their 
experiences. ANOVA indicated significant differences in the stress level 
across clinical courses (F[5,406]=9.58, p<.0001). Students in pediatric 
nursing courses in both ADN and BSN programs reported the highest degree of 
stress. Students enrolled in foundations of nursing courses experienced the 
least amount of stress in their clinical practice. A t-test revealed 
significant differences in stress (t=2.16, p=.03) and challenge (t=2.04, 
p=.042) scores between ADN and BSN students. ADN students were more stressed 
and challenged in clinical than BSN students. Stress increased with the level 
in the program with the second year of the ADN program and senior year of the 
BSN program being the most stressful (F[5,401]=7.64, p<.0001). Factors 
identified by both ADN and BSN students which created a stressful clinical 
experience for them included interacting with and observations by the teacher, 
fear of making errors, and fear of contracting diseases. Factor analysis with 
Varimax rotation revealed four sets of emotions: stimulation, fear, 
disappointment and confidence. Overall, students found clinical to be 
stimulating and a way of developing their confidence in practice.

