Use of the LSQ and Kolb's Learning Style Model in Assessing Student Nurses

Cheryl M. Bourguignon

Many nursing educators use Kolb's Experiential Learning Model to assess the 
learning styles of student nurses. At present, no reliable instrument exists 
that demonstrates Kolb's proposed four construct model (Thinking, Watching, 
Feeling, Doing). Kolb's original instrument, the LSI, and poor reliability and 
only three constructs could be extracted during factor analysis rather than 
the four proposed. Attempting to correct some of the flaws in Kolb's LSI, 
Marshall and Merritt (1985) developed a new instrument, the Learning Style 
Questionnaire (LSQ). After initial testing of the LSQ, the reliability was 
much higher but again only three of Kolb's original constructs were extracted 
during factor analysis. The purpose of this study therefore, was to determine 
if the LSQ could be used to assess Kolb's learning styles in a sample of 
student nurses. The sample of 274 basic and RN completion nursing students 
ranged in age from 19-55 years (mean=27.2, sd=8.1). Exploratory factor 
analysis on the LSQ extracted only three of Kolb's original four constructs. 
Using LISREL for confirmatory factor analysis, the LSQ model with only three 
latent factors (Thinking, Feeling, Doing) possessed good data-model fit (chi-
square=5.36, 3df, p=0.148, GFI=.073, and AGFI=0.946). These results call into 
question Kolb's original four construct learning style model. Nursing 
educators should be skeptical about using the LSQ and Kolb's model to identify 
the learning styles of student nurses until they are further tested and 
revised.

