Development of an Instrument to Measure Patient Satisfaction with 
Postoperative Pain Management

Bunny Pozehl, S. Barnason, L. Zimmerman, J. Rowles, D. Degner, and D. Jones

The purpose of this psychometric study was to develop an instrument to measure 
patient satisfaction with postoperative pain management. Measurement of 
patient satisfaction with pain management is a standard set forth by the 
American Pain Society (APS). The only available measure of patient 
satisfaction is the APS survey which may be limited in sensitivity to factors 
influencing patient satisfaction. A 25 item, 4 point likert scale (strongly 
agree to strongly disagree), was developed and tested at hospital discharge in 
a convenience sample of 101 patients undergoing total hip replacement, total 
knee replacement, or microlumbar discectomy. Content validity of the 
instrument was established by a  panel of clinical experts in pain management. 
Construct validation consisted of principal axis factor analysis procedures. 
Thirteen items with factor loadings ranging from .39 to .79 were retained. A 
one factor solution accounting for 41% of the variance was chosen based on the 
Kaiser criterion, the scree plot, and interpretability of the data. Internal 
consistency reliability for the 13 item instrument was .89. An instrument with 
documented validity and reliability to measure patient satisfaction with 
postoperative pain management is essential to measure progress towards the 
Agency of Health Care Policy and Research's goal of enhanced patient 
satisfaction with pain management. Further testing of this instrument is in 
progress.

