Nursing Benefits of a Patient/Family Centered Care Model

Mary E. Muller

Innovations diffuse through organizations at varying rates. Individual 
perceptions and decisions contribute to this variance. Therefore, evaluation 
of a new practice model must include the individual's perceptions of the 
model. This study considered individuals' ratings as part of the evaluation of 
a Patient/Family Centered Care (PFCC) model. Model implementation began in all 
units of a tertiary-care hospital in Central Ohio in January 1992. Data was 
collected for this study in March 1995. Research packets delivered to all 
patient care staff contained an Assessment of PFCC Model Implementation (APMI) 
and the Job Diagnostic Survey (JDS). The 10 item APMI measured the 
individual's perception of the extent of PFCC model implementation on the 
unit. The range of possible APMI scores was 4 to 40. The 48 item JDS contains 
15 subscales measuring job characteristics, satisfaction with work 
environment, and personal attitudes about work. The RNs also responded to the 
21 item Control Over Nursing Practice Scale (CONPS). Four hundred eighty staff 
members participated, 375 RNs and 105 non RNs. Participants were divided into 
three groups by APMI scores: Group 1 (score < 22), Group 2 (score 22-27) and 
Group 3 (score > 27). ANOVA revealed significant differences among the groups 
for most subscales of the JDS and for RN CONP scores. Members of Group 3 
(those with high PFCC implementation scores) and significantly higher scores 
for 8 JDS subscales, including Autonomy, General Job Satisfaction, and 
Satisfaction wit Co-workers. RNs in group 3 had higher CONPS scores. While 
there were several limitations to this study, the results suggested that 
individuals perceptions of PFCC model implementation was critical to the 
model's impact on their work satisfaction and control of practice.

