Evaluation of the Effectiveness of an Elementary School-Based Victimization 
Strategy

Mary A. Megel, Bevely J. Hays, and Dick Oldfield

The U.S. Advisory Board on Child Ause and Neglect labeled child abuse a 
"national emergency." Public schools have been one of the more responsive 
institutions to this problem. This study employed a posttest-only control 
group design to assess the effects of a victimization pervention program on 
elementary school student anxiety, reporting of abuse, knowledge of general 
prevention concepts, and knowledge of difficult to acquire prevention 
concepts. The sample consisted of 1,269 children (658 experimental and 611 
control) in grades 1-6 in four public schools. Parental consent was obtained. 
Data were collected using the Revised Children's Manifest Anxiety Scale, the 
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children, and the Children's Knowledge of 
Abuse Questionnaire. Analyses using ANOVA and t test revealed that the 
experimental group at all grade levels demonstrated both significantly greater 
knowledge of general victimization prevention information, F(1, 245) = 131.88, 
p < .001, and difficult to acquire concepts, t(1, 266) = 7.23, p < .001. 
Additional analysis revealed that (a) when reassessed after 3 months, a 
subsample of the experimental group showed no decrease in acquired prevention 
information, (b) no differences in anxiety scores existed between groups, and 
(c) first-time student abuse disclosures were greater in the experimental 
group. These findings have important implications for elementary curricular 
design for abuse prevention and for the advocacy role of the school nurse.

