Nursing Students' Perceptions of Caring Behaviors in the Teaching-Learning 
Environment

Marjorie A. Schaffer

Nursing educators have been challenged to develop strategies that integrate 
the concept and practice of caring into curricula. Dialogue between students 
and faculty is one strategy for promoting students' understanding of caring 
and their motivation to care for others. Senior and junior nursing students 
(n=76) evaluated the effectiveness of faculty-facilitated small groups that 
addressed concerns and events in the teaching-learning environment. An 
analysis of student perceptions of caring from faculty and peers was conducted 
based on a caring behavior framework. In addition to open-ended questions on 
caring behaviors in students and faculty and outcomes of group participation, 
students evaluated the frequency of four specific caring behaviors 
(willingness to help, sensitivity, presence, and supportiveness) exhibited by 
their peers and nursing faculty. Students identified 51 instances of faculty 
caring, 46 instances of caring from peers, and very few uncaring behaviors. 
Themes of group participation outcomes described by students were: 1) 
facilitation of communication, 2) provision of a support system, and 3) the 
building of relationships in the nursing education community. Although pressed 
with extensive curricular demands, nursing faculty can promote students' 
perceptions of a caring learning environment and the development of a sense of 
community support by providing opportunities for dialogue about student 
learning experiences. Dialogue between faculty and students encouraged a 
reciprocal caring process and provided an impetus for making changes that 
increased student satisfaction.

