Emotional Well-Being in People with Chronic Disabilities: A Longitudinal 
Analysis

N. Margaret Wineman

The purpose of this research was to examine the effect of illness uncertainty 
on emotional well-being (EWB) in people with chronic disabilities. The 
research is unique in that it examines the relationship in two comparative 
groups, those with multiple sclerosis (MS) and those with spinal cord injury 
(SCI), groups that may be at uncommonly high risk for negative outcomes 
because of their disabilities but with marked differences in illness 
uncertainty. Also examined were the effects of functional ability, negative 
life events, daily hassles, personal and social resources, appraisal of 
stress, and coping behavior. To examine effects, a model, based on the 
relationship among stress, appraisal, and coping proposed by Lazarus and 
Folkman, was tested longitudinally. Survey data were collected during three 
yearly home interviews from 324 subjects with MS and 179 with SCI. Results of 
model testing support the idea that a person's long-term response to a chronic 
disability is the outcome of a system of interrelated variables that affect 
EWB. Influential variables include contextual stressors, personal and social 
resources, appraisal of stress, and coping. Individuals with MS< compared to 
those with SCI, may be at higher risk for the negative consequences of 
continual uncertainty; they perceived their disability as more threatening, 
felt less able to handle negative life events, experienced more daily hassles, 
and felt greater emotional distress. For all subjects, a surprising finding 
was that people with longstanding disabilities may learn how to manage when 
their exposure to harm and their uncertainty are continually high. The model 
provides a wellness-oriented framework for understanding the processes that 
influence and predict EWB, and thus, it provides guidance for nursing 
interventions in the home setting.

