Implementation of Pressure Ulcer Prevention in a Medical Center

Barbara Pieper, M. Sugrue, C. Heimann, K. Sprague, and M. Weiland

This prospective, descriptive study examined pressure ulcer prevention 
strategies implemented in 7 facilities. For 2 months on selected units, all 
patients were followed until discharged. The Braden Scale was used for risk 
assessment. Patient assessment forms were developed for the study. Patients 
followed numbered 694 with 210 being assessed at risk for pressure ulcers at 
the first data collection point. For all patients, significantly more (p<.05) 
had a pressure reducing bed surface (at risk, 60%), were found with the head 
of the bed in low position (at risk, 82%), had a lift sheet (at risk, 60%), or 
had body lotion (at risk, 63%). Significantly few patients had a bed trapeze 
(at risk, 13%), positioning wedge (at risk, 26%), incontinence cleaner or 
barrier ointment (at risk, 21%), heel protection (at risk, 20%), or a chair 
cushion (at risk, 15%). Patients at risk had significantly (p<.05) few 
pressure ulcer prevention care plans or charting notations, posted turning 
schedule, or pressure ulcer educational materials at the bedside. Patients at 
risk for pressure ulcers had significantly (p<.05) more prevention 
interventions (M=4.5) than patients not at risk (M=3). Similar statistics were 
present at the other data collection points. Although nursing interventions 
are based on patients' assessments, the implementation of prevention 
interventions was low. These results have implications for quality of care, 
cost, and legal concerns. Future research should explore factors which affect 
implementation of pressure ulcer prevention strategies.

