Medication Administration Through Enteral Feeding Catheters

D. C. Belknap, M. Petermann, and C. F. Seifert

Enteral feeding catheter (EFC) obstruction is a common complication when used 
for administration of oral medication forms. This descriptive survey was 
designed to investigate characteristics of EFC obstruction and current 
knowledge and practices regarding medication administration through EFCs in 
the intensive care unit (ICU) population. From a random sample of 12,069 
members of the American Association of Critical Care Nurses who were mailed a 
postcard invitation to participate, 1,700 agreed to participate and 1,167 
(68.7%) returned survey questionnaires. Nurses estimated that 35% of their 
patients received 8.9 medication doses/day through the EFC. Medication 
obstruction rate was 15.6% (+20.9). Crushed solid tablets, enteric coated (EC) 
tablets, and sustained-release (SR) medications contributed to EFC 
obstruction, although liquid forms often were available. Nurses' primary 
source of knowledge about medication administration through EFCs was clinical 
practice (56.9%) and consultation with peers (21.7%); only 19% had attended a 
relevant inservice. Content of written agency guidelines varied considerably. 
Of eight recommended administration techniques, 74% of nurses used > two that 
were inappropriate. Factors significantly associated with lower EFC 
obstruction rates (p<.001) included 1) assistance from pharmacy service to 
insure liquid medication forms, 2) attendance at a relevant seminar or 
inservice, and 3) not routinely crushing and administering EC or SR 
medications through the EFC. Implications: Collaboration between nursing and 
pharmacy services to insure delivery of liquid medications and avoid crushed 
medications may reduce the high rate of catheter obstruction due to medication 
administration. There is a need for more formal dissemination of research-
based practice guidelines.

