Prevalence & Determinants of Preventive Health Behaviors of Older Rural Women

Carol H. Pullen, K. L. Fiandt, and S. N. Walker

As women age they become increasingly at risk for chronic illness and injury. 
Research indicates that older women experience more disability than men and 
that older rural women may be among the lower users of preventive services. 
The purpose of this study was to a) describe the prevalence of receipt of 
clinical preventive services recommended by the US Preventive Services Task 
Force (screening, counseling, immunizations) and the practice of healthy 
lifestyles, and b) determine the extent to which personal influences (sources 
of information and access to care) explain preventive health behavior among 
older women in rural Nebraska. A descriptive correlational study design 
employed computer-assisted telephone survey methodology to collect data from 
102 women aged 65 and older in four rural counties. The interview schedule 
included established instruments with known psychometric characteristics as 
well as inventories developed by the investigators. While the women reported 
generally healthy lifestyles, the prevalence of receipt of most preventive 
services was quite low. Hierarchical regression analyses explained 23% to 77% 
of the variance in five categories of preventive health behavior (screening, 
counseling, immunizations, health-promoting lifestyle change attempts in past 
year), with both personal and contextual variables making significant 
contributions. Understanding of the patterns and determinants of preventive 
health behavior is essential for the design of interventions to enhance such 
behavior among rural older women, an underserved population.

