Factors Influencing Protection of Children from Farm Injuries

Barbara C. Lee, L. S. Jenkins, and J. Westaby

What are the factors affecting protection of children from farming activities 
known to be hazardous? A descriptive correlational study was conducted guided 
by the theory of planned behavior. This theory posits that health promoting 
behaviors are most accurately predicted by behavioral control. Using mail 
survey research methods, a stratified random sample of 1,151 Wisconsin dairy 
farm fathers with children younger than 14 years of age completed a 200-item 
instrument which measured theoretical variables in relation to the subjects' 
intentions to allow their young children to engage in three high risk 
activities: driving a tractor, being an extra rider on a tractor, and being 
near the hind legs of dairy cows. With a response rate of 87.5%, demographic 
data depicted the typical dairy farm father as a 41-year-old high school 
graduate who works more than 70 hours/week on the farm and has a household of 
5.1 family members. For the tractor driving behavior, multivariate analyses 
revealed that attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived control account for 
nearly four-fifths (R2adj=.79) of the variance of subjects' behavioral 
intention and that attitudes regarding intentions to permit a child to drive a 
tractor were more predictive (beta=.60) than subjective norms (beta=.26) or 
perceived control (beta=.09). The factor most closely associated with fathers' 
attitudes was the desire for a child to gain work experience (r=.74, p=.001). 
Results suggest specific approaches for nursing interventions designed to 
influence protective behaviors of family farm parents.

