Parents' Responses to Bone Marrow Transplantation for their Children with 
Genetic Disorders

Cynthia A. Prows and Gail C. McCain

The prognosis associated with Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT) for children 
with genetic disorders is uncertain, with varying results including: cure, 
stabilization of symptoms, debilitating morbidity, and death. This grounded 
theory study described ten parents' responses when BMT was offered as a 
treatment option for their children with genetic disorders. The mother and 
father respondents participated in separate, in-depth interviews at the time 
BMT was considered as a treatment option. Interviews were tape-recorded and 
transcribed verbatim. The Ethnograph software program was used to assist with 
data management. Data was analyzed with the constant comparative method. The 
basic social problem confronting parents was the conflicting alternatives of 
life, suffering, and death for their children. It was certain that these 
children would die from their genetic disorders, but without having to endure 
the pain and suffering of a BMT. Alternatively the BMT treatment would be 
difficult, but with the chance of arresting disease progression. The basic 
social processes used by parents were: 'weighing conflicting alternatives,' 
and 'taking-any-chance.' Strategies used to weigh conflicting alternatives 
included: searching for information, downward comparisons, and finding 
spiritual meaning. Strategies related to 'taking-any-chance' included: 
acquiring resources, living day-to-day, managing relationships, and 'sticking 
to decision.'

