Coping, Hardiness, Health Status, and Absenteeism in Staff Nurses

Barbara J. Martin

Absenteeism is a serious organizational problem that jeopardizes the quality 
of patient care and increases healthcare costs. The focus of withdrawal 
behavior research has been on work-related reasons for withdrawal as opposed 
to personal disposition toward the use of withdrawal as a function of coping 
with personal problems or life stress. This disposition may cause certain 
employees to be resistant to changing their excessive absence patterns. This 
study examined the relationships between coping, personality hardiness, and 
voluntary absence. The random sample consisted of 149 non-unionized full-time 
staff nurses working in a large tertiary care medical center. Coping, 
hardiness, and health status were assessed for each subject utilizing the Ways 
of Coping Questionnaire (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), the Personal Views Survey 
(Kobasa, 1979), and two items from the National Health Interview Survey (Adams 
& Benson, 1991). Subject absences were tracked for 26 weeks. Periods of 
absence and attendance were qualitatively assessed. Discriminant analyses 
demonstrated that the most consistent predictor variables for coping strategy 
of problem-solving. Higher scores for all three predictors were associated 
with lower absenteeism. Nurses frequently described themselves as fatigued and 
stressed while a majority believed that sick time benefits should be used for 
physical illness and "mental health" days. Information regarding the 
relationships between coping, hardiness, and absence withdrawal behavior is 
valuable for the nurse manager in terms of individual and unit systems 
assessment and intervention. Recommended interventions may serve to lessen the 
stress that nurses experience, improve their physical and psychological well-
being, and strengthen ineffective coping skills.

