Intervention by Advanced Practice Nurses to East the Transition to the Nursing 
Home

Mariah Snyder, Muriel B. Ryden, Kathie Krichbaum, Christine Heine, Val 
Pearson, and Judy Hanscom

Admission to a nursing home is a life event that commonly is dreaded by 
elders. Institutionalization usually is necessitated by cumulative losses that 
put the individual at risk for depression. The study reported here is part of 
a four year project funded by NINR to determine the effect of the 
implementation of research-based protocols by advanced practice nurses (APNs) 
on resident outcomes and fiscal outcomes related to selected clinical 
problems, one of which is depression. Using the AHCPR guidelines for 
depression, a protocol was developed to assess for level of depression or 
level of risk and then treat appropriately. Subjects (a target of 36 at each 
facility) are residents newly admitted to three comparable nursing homes: two 
treatment and one control condition. Although we anticipated that a subset of 
subjects would be assessed as depressed, we believed that all newly admitted 
residents are, at a minimum, at risk for depression. Therefore, in addition to 
the standardized protocol for depression, we developed a comprehensive 
structured interview to be administered by the APN to obtain information which 
the literature suggests might be relevant to adjustment. An intervention 
protocol, "Transition to the Nursing Home", was developed for APNs to 
individualize and then implement with each resident subject. The following 
instruments are being administered to all three groups of subjects at 
admission, 14 weeks, and 26 weeks: Geriatric Depression Scale, Philadelphia 
Geriatric Center Morale Scale, and Apparent Emotion Scale. The Satisfaction 
With the Nursing Home Scale is administered at two and six months. The 
interview and protocol will be described. The findings and the implications 
will be discussed.

