An Instrument to Measure Attentional Demands

Debra A. Jansen

According to Kaplan and Kaplan's theory of attention, excessive demand for 
attention produces a reduced capacity to direct attention and thus difficulty 
in managing everyday activities. The purposes of this study were to identify 
attentional demands for health elderly and to develop a closed-ended 
instrument to measure them. Thirty (22 males, 8 females) community dwelling 
elderly (ages 66-87 years; M=77) were interviewed to ascertain their 
perceptions of demands in four theoretically derived domains. For the physical 
environmental domain, the elderly identified external demands such as the 
weather, lighting, and noise as interfering with their daily lives. Examples 
of informational demands or factors that interfere with perception and 
interpretation were facing new situations due to moving and the loss of a 
spouse, and vision and hearing difficulties. For behavioral demands, or 
biophysical and situational factors that interfere wit inclinations, examples 
were tedious tasks such as exercising and cooking, as well as not driving, 
financial restrictions, and loss of physical stamina. Examples of affective 
demands or feelings that preoccupy and distract were loneliness and worries 
and sadness about their own health and future. A content analysis of the 
interview data produced items for the Attentional Demands Survey (ADS). A 
report of the validity and reliability along with a factor analysis of the ADS 
data will be provided. The ADS will be used in future interventions aimed at 
decreasing demands and restoring attention in the elderly.

