Appraisal, Hardiness, and Self-Care Power in Oncology Spouse Caregivers

Melody L. McKinney

Spouses of cancer patients are a population at risk for stress-related 
illness. A contributing factor may be difficulty in meeting their own in 
self-care needs. Lazarus' and Folkman's cognitive appraisal theory of stress 
and coping (1984) and Orem's (1991) conceptualization of the power components 
of self-care agency were used to explore the influence of appraisal and 
hardiness on the caregiver's power to engage in self-care. Self-report 
questionnaires were given to 21 spouses from two outpatient cancer centers and 
a hospice homecare agency. Subjects completed Oberst's Appraisal of Caregiving 
Scale, Pollock's Health-Related Hardiness Scale, and the researcher developed, 
Power of Self-Care Scale. Current internal consistency reliabilities for the 
three scales ranged from .62-.97. Using a descriptive, correlational design, 
self-care power was found to be related to benign appraisal (r=.55, p<.05), 
but not to threat appraisal, hardiness, or any personal and situational 
characteristics. Benign appraisal was additionally found to be related to 
threat appraisal (r=.69, p<.001), hardiness (r=.64, p<.01), and caregiver 
disability (r=-.57, p<.01). Findings from multiple regression analysis; after 
controlling for the effect of caregiver disability, revealed benign appraisal 
be a significant predictor (Beta=.72, p=<.01) of self-care power, with 34% of 
the variance accounted for by the regression evaluation (p=.01). Findings 
support the cognitive appraisal model of stress and coping. Caregivers who 
perceived their situations as nonstressful (benign) had greater self-care 
power. Caregivers who perceived their situations as more benign and less 
threatening reported greater hardiness. Data suggest that interventions 
designed to modify the caregiver's stress perception may enhance perceived 
hardiness in the caregiver and strengthen his or her power for self-care.
