Autonomic Reactivity in Nonorganic Failure to Thrive Infants

Deborah Steward

Nonorganic failure to thrive (NOFTT) is a significant problem facing nurses 
caring for infants. NOFTT accounts for 10% of all children seen in an 
outpatient setting. Even after NOFTT is resolved, infants are at high risk for 
long-term adverse effects such as developmental delay, cognitive deficits, 
behavioral disorders, and poor growth. Prior research has focused on the 
mother's contribution to NOFTT. Specifically and using a using a 
psychobiological framework, reactivity of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) 
and behavioral characteristics of the infant may play a role. The specific aim 
of this study is to examine differences between ANS tone and behavioral 
characteristics in NOFTT and normal infants. Using a case-control descriptive, 
comparative design, infants with NOFTT will be matched by age and sex with 
infants who have a normal growth trajector. Using chi-square and t-test, 
infants with NOFTT will be compared to normal infants using the following 
data: 1) ANS tone as assessed by heart rate variability measured by spectral 
analysis, Poincare plots, and standard deviation and 2) behavioral 
characteristics as assessed by the Infant Characteristics Questionnaire. In 
addition, using Spearman-rho and Pearson's correlations, the relationship 
between measures of heart rate variability and infant behaviors will be 
determined. The findings from this study may provide evidence of underlying 
physiologic processes contributing to the abnormal behavioral reactivity in 
NOFTT infants.

