The Care and Treatment Progression of Bone Marrow Transplant Patients with 
Breast Cancer

Lisa L. Berta

The purpose of this study was to describe events in the care and treatment 
progression of patients undergoing an Adult Autologous Bone Morrow Transplant 
(ABMT) or Peripheral Stem Cell Transplant (PSCT) for breast cancer. Due to the 
lack of nursing literature concerning the disease and treatment events with 
ABMT, there is a necessity to study these conditions. The setting was a five-
bed bone marrow transplant unit in a Midwestern teaching hospital. Roy's 
adaptation theory was used to frame the study. A retrospective review of 16 
medical records and Southwest Oncology Group Toxicity Records, was done. The 
incidence, timing, and severity (1=low, 4=high) of nausea and vomiting, use of 
blood products, neutropenia,and stomatitis were analyzed. Neutropenia was 
experienced by 100% of the patients in the sample for a duration of 10 to 26 
days. All patients reached a severity grade of four for neutropenia. 
Stomatitis occurred in nine patients (56.3%). Only three patients reached a 
severity grade of three. All 16 patients experienced nausea and vomiting. 
Those patients with one onset and extended durations also had the highest 
severity levels. Nine patients did require TNP for nutritional support. The 
use of PRCBs (mean number of transfusion 2.75) occurred less frequently than 
the use of platelets (mean number of transfusions 5.13). Day +4 was 
significant for both blood and platelet use. A critical pathway has been 
developed incorporating the results from this research which will help 
standardize the care of ABMIT patients with breast cancer.

