Critical Care Nurses' Knowledge of Pressure Ulcer Prevention, Staging, and 
Would Description

Jacalynn C. Mattern

The purpose of this study was to ascertain critical care (CC) nurses' 
knowledge of pressure ulcer prevention, staging, and description in reference 
to the AHCPR guideline on pressure ulcer prediction and prevention. King's 
conceptual framework and content related to pressure ulcer prevention guided 
the study. A cross-section survey design was used to collect data from 98 
medical-surgical (MS) nurses and 75 CC nurses. The Pressure Ulcer Knowledge 
Test (PUKT) consisted of 47 True/False items and had a reliability of .68 by 
Cronbach's alpha. Items were hand sorted into Prevention (33 items), Staging 
(7 items), and Wound (7 items) subscores. The total PUKT and subscores did not 
differ significantly between the CC and MS nurses. CC nurses' knowledge was 
not affected by when these nurses had heard a lecture or read an article about 
pressure ulcers except CC nurses Wound subscore was significantly higher the 
more recently they had heard a lecture about pressure ulcers, F(2,72)=3.53, 
p=.03. The percentage of items answered correctly on the PUKT by CC nurses 
ranged from 15% to 83%. Only 13% of CC nurses had read the AHCPR guideline on 
prevention. This study revealed a knowledge deficit about pressure ulcer 
prevention information among CC nurses. Deficiencies in nurses' knowledge may 
be documented by testing and educational programs need to be developed to 
correct these learning needs. Since pressure ulcers have been identified as a 
national health care concern and since nurses have a primary role in pressure 
ulcer prevention, research addressing nurses' knowledge about pressure ulcers 
is relevant.

