Development and Features of Nurse Shared Governance

Janet K. Pringle Specht

Shared governance is one innovation used to restructure health care 
organizations to promote the work of professionals and attain the goals of the 
organization. Nurse shared governance is a practice model that defines a 
partnership between professional nurses and organization managers for 
authority and accountability for nursing care. Implementation of the features 
of shared nurse governance requires major changes and is developmental, often 
taking five years or more to get the features of the model in place and 
professional nurses comfortable with their role changes.

A cross-sectional survey design was used to compare the type and number of 
features of shared governance on hospital inpatient units where nurse shared 
governance has been implemented for 0, 3 to 7, and 10 or more years. The 
convenience sample used was comprised of 2 hospitals having no shared 
governance, 2 hospitals with shared governance implemented from 3 to 7 years, 
and 2 hospitals with shared governance for 10 or more years. Data was 
collected from 3 samples: inpatient care units (5 from each hospital), staff 
nurses (25 from each unit), and patients (25 from each unit). Nurses and 
patients were mailed a structured response format questionnaire to collect 
both unit and individual information.

The study compared the relationships among the levels of perceived nurse 
autonomy and accountability, years of development of shared nurse governance, 
and numbers of features of shared nurse governance with nurse job satisfaction 
and patient satisfaction. Data were analyzed at the patient unit level with 
aggregated nurse and patient data using correlation, regression, and path 
analysis.

