Diabetes Education: Does the Content Affect Patient Outcomes

Ruth M. Borthwick

Educating a patient with diabetes is an inherent part in the treatment and 
management of this chronic disease. Diabetic researchers encourage patient 
educators to incorporate the concept of self-care into their educational 
intervention to provide patients with the tools they need to manage their 
disease. This led to the hypothesis: Patients exposed to self-care content 
during their diabetic education will have a greater weight loss and lower 
hemoglobin A1c levels than patients attending programs not incorporating this 
content. The concept of self-care is clearly identified in Dorthea Orem's 
theory of self-care deficit. She supported the concept that individuals have 
an inherent ability to manage their health. Along with her theory, Bandura's 
concept of self-efficacy served as the theoretical framework for this study.

A quasi-experimental retrospective pre-test/posttest design was utilized. The 
purpose of the study was to determine if there was a difference in patient 
outcomes based on the content the patient received during his diabetic 
education. Patients attending three ADA approved diabetic education programs 
served as the population for the study. Only one of the education programs 
incorporated self-care information in their curriculum. Following a nine month 
ex-post facto collection of data, changes in weight and hemoglobin A1c were 
analyzed utilizing the analysis of covariance to determine the differences 
among patient attending the three educational programs. The analysis supported 
the hypothesis in relation to the hemoglobin A1c, but not in relation the 
weight loss.

