Effects of Postoperative Teaching Interventions on Pain Rating and Patient 
Satisfaction with Pain Management

Joanne R. Rowles, D. J. Jones, and D. F. Degner

The purposes of this experimental study were to test the effects of 
preoperative and discharge teaching interventions on postoperative pain 
measured by the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) and to determine patient 
satisfaction with pain management, measured by the Pain Management 
Satisfaction Scale (PMSS) in a sample of selected orthopedic and neurologic 
patients (n=106). Subjects were assigned to one of four intervention groups 
receiving either preoperative teaching, both preoperative and discharge 
teaching, or no teaching. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine 
differences in pain scores (NRS scores) and PMSS scores at during 
hospitalization, and at 3 and 6 weeks post discharge for each of the 4 
intervention groups. For the orthopedic patients (n=65) significant group 
differences were reported for pain rating scores on postoperative day 1 
(F[3,63 df] = 3.39, p < .05) and postoperative day 3 (F [3,61 df] = 4.75, p < 
.01) of hospitalization, and post hoc Tukeys revealed that scores were higher 
on both day for the preoperative teaching group compared to the other groups. 
In regard to patient satisfaction, significant differences on PMSS scores 
occurred at 3 weeks post discharge (F [6,160 df] = 3.39, p < .01) and Tukeys 
showed differences between the preoperative (M=2.77) and discharge teaching 
groups (M=3.03) and the preoperative group and no teaching group (M==3.17). In 
addition, similar findings were reported at 6 weeks post discharge. These 
findings indicate the need to further explore the influences of patient 
teaching on postoperative pain and patient satisfaction.

