Effects of Quality of Life on Treatment Decisions in Patients Receiving 
Chemotherapy

Tina M. Nink

Quality of life research has gained enormous interest in the past decade. The 
purpose of this literature review is to examine research aimed at addressing: 
What is the relationship between perceived quality of life and the decision to 
initiate and continue chemotherapeutic treatment in the adult cancer 
population? Using Parses' (1981) theory of Man-Living-Health as a guide for 
this review, research directed toward exploring relationships between quality 
of life and chemotherapeutic treatment decisions have been selected. 
Literature suggests that a relationship does exist between subjectively 
perceived quality of life and the decisions regarding chemotherapeutic 
treatment. There appears to be agreement among researchers that factors which 
negatively affect quality of life result in decisions to discontinue treatment 
emerges as the leading negative effect on quality of life resulting in these 
decisions. Implications for nursing practice include quality of life 
assessments prior to, and throughout the treatment process; patient education 
regarding potential side effects of treatment; prior to, and throughout the 
treatment process; patient education regarding potential side effects of 
treatment; continuous assessment of side effects of treatment and the 
underlying disease process; interventions aimed at reducing and alleviating 
negative effects of treatment and the disease process, thus minimizing the 
adverse effect on perceived quality of life, which may result in potential 
loss of cure and possibly death. Suggestions for future research are also 
discussed.

