The Effect of Glycopyrrolate Premedication on Postoperative Sore Throat

Patricia Stratelak, W. White, and D. Wenzel

Problem: Most patients given general anesthesia require endotracheal 
intubation. Most of the literature indicates that > 40% experience a sore 
throat or hoarseness. Research has demonstrated this pain can be more severe 
than incisional pain.

Purpose: To compare the incidence and severity of postoperative sore throats 
in surgical patients receiving and not receiving glycopyrrolate as part of 
their preoperative medication.

Sample: A convenience sample procedure yielded 198 consenting patients between 
the ages of 18-65 (x=37, 78% female), classified as ASA I or II, who were 
undergoing elective, non-ear/nose/throat surgery at a midwestern, suburban 
community hospital.

Method: Patients were assigned randomly to receive a preoperative injection of 
meperidine 50-75 mg, hydroxyzine 50 mg and glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg, (Group 1) or 
similar doses of meperidine and hydroxyzine without glycopyrrolate (Group 2). 
Twenty to 30 hours postoperatively, a trained RN interviewer, blind to the 
subject's treatment status, administered the Loeser instrument to determine 
the presence of a sore throat and its severity.

Results: Postoperative sore throat incidence was significantly higher 
(Chi-square; P<0.05) in Group 1. Of the patients who did complain of a 
postoperative sore throat, those who received glycopyrrolate had significantly 
(Mann-Whitney U Test; P<0.05) greater throat pain than the patients who did 
not receive glycopyrrolate.

lmplications: Given the previously demonstrated side effects of glycopyrrolate 
and the declining need for medication induced anticholinergics during 
anesthesia, this study's finding add to the debate favoring use of the drug 
only on an as needed basis.

