Effects of Critical Pathway Programs on Caregiver Team Interaction, 
Cohesiveness and Outcomes: A Pilot Project

Vicky Pebsworth Debold

Hospitals across the country are rapidly adopting critical pathway programs. 
These programs are believed to increase staff effectiveness and productivity 
which in turn, reduces patient care costs but improves patient outcomes. 
Underlying these presumed effects is the assumption that pathway programs 
change the way caregiver teams interact which then produces the desired staff 
and patient outcomes. This pilot project was designed to test whether there 
appears to be an empirical basis for assuming that interaction patterns and 
selected outcomes differ in pathway and non-pathway units. The project 
employed a static group comparison design and was conducted in two intensive 
care units, one that uses pathways and one that does not. The questionnaires 
distributed to nurses and physicians working in the units contained two 
measures of caregiver team interaction, two cohesiveness measures and three 
outcome measures -- job satisfaction, perceived technical quality of care and 
perceived ability to meet family member needs. Differences in mean scores 
across these measures will be assessed using descriptive statistics and tests 
of significance. To more fully understand differences in interaction and 
cohesiveness, a network analysis of formal, informal and social interaction 
frequencies will be performed using the UCINET program. The results of the 
pilot project will not only suggest whether the assumptions about pathways and 
their effects are valid which is important to researchers in the systems area, 
but the project employs measures and methods for studying interaction which 
could be used in many other areas of nursing research.

