The Influence of Family and Friend Support on Weight Control Behavior in Low 
Income Culturally Diverse Women

Ernestine D. Stevenson, J. Walcott-McQuigg, L. Quinn, R. Marcantonio, A. Choi, 
and D. Camaioni

Little is known regarding the relationship of social support to weight control 
behavior (diet control and exercise), especially in low income culturally 
diverse women. Social support has been shown to influence variation in health 
promotion behavior. This study was designed to examine the effects of family 
and friend support on weight control behavior in 135 low-income women (36 
African-American, 31 Caucasian , 36 Hispanic, 32 Native American), between the 
ages of 30 and 60. The women were recruited from hospital clinics, community 
clinics, and community service centers. A questionnaire measuring family and 
friend support for diet and exercise behavior as well as actual diet and 
exercise behavior was administered in face-to face interviews. Reliability for 
the family and friend support scale using coefficient alpha raged from .66 to 
.95. Pearson's correlations revealed that family support for participation in 
exercise influenced African-American (r=.37, p<.05) and Native American 
(r=.40, p<.05) womens' rates of weight control behavior, while friends support 
for participation in exercise influenced rates of weight control behavior in 
Caucasian (r=.40, p<.05) and Hispanic (r=.40, p<.05) women. Identification of 
factors that influence weight control behavior in low income culturally 
diverse women will assist nurses and other health professionals to tailor 
effective health promoting interventions.

