Leisure Management, Leisure Participation, and Well-Being in Midlife Women

Judith H. McDevitt

Although nurses promote the health of midlife women by advising them to 
participate in leisure activities such as exercise,just how women incorporate 
leisure activities into their work and family lives remains poorly understood. 
The purposes of this study were (1) to discover how midlife women manage their 
leisure to include the activities they prefer, and (2) to examine the links 
between their leisure management, leisure participation, and psychological 
well-being. Using naturalistic inquiry, 40 employed women aged 40 to 60 and 
living in a culturally diverse older suburb of Chicago were interviewed 
regarding their leisure management. They also completed a questionnaire 
including Kelly's comprehensive checklist of leisure participation covering 
physical, social, family, quiet home-based, outdoor, cultural, and volunteer 
activities; Bradburn's Affect Balance Scale; and Neugarten's Life Satisfaction 
Index. Inductive analysis was conducted using QSR NUDIST 3.04 software to 
code, index, and tree structure the interview data in order to identify 
differing approaches to how midlife woman manage their leisure. Data matrix 
displays then related these differing approaches to leisure management to the 
women's levels of leisure participation and well-being. Differences in leisure 
participation and well-being by leisure management were further analyzed by 
one-way analyses of variance. Findings from this study will be used to develop 
nursing interventions that will more effectively support leisure participation 
and well-being for women during midlife.

