Ohio Physicians Perceived Incentives for Association with Advanced Practice 
Nurses

Joyce Richelle Arand

This descriptive comparative study is a replication study conducted of one by 
John Bezjak in 1985. The study examined Ohio physician's incentives to 
associate with advanced practice nurses. The physician incentives were 
compared to physician demographics including: number of years in practice, 
gender, the state where medical school was attended, and specialty area of 
practice. Participants for the study were Ohio physicians associated with 
nurses in advanced practice who are members of the Ohio Coalition of Nurses 
with Specialty Certification. Data were collected by mail questionnaires. Data 
analysis includes descriptions of the demographic characteristics, factor 
analysis, analysis of variance, and a specific comparison test. Results showed 
no relationship between the demographic variables and physician's incentives 
for association with advanced practice nurses. The major reason Ohio 
physicians associate with advanced practice nurses were economic incentives 
and physician satisfaction. The study indicated that even though statues limit 
the scope of advanced practice nursing in the state of Ohio, some physicians 
still choose to practice with advanced practice nurses. Physicians in the 
study feel that there is a benefit to collaborative practice. It was concluded 
from this study that a roster of advanced practice nurses within the state of 
Ohio is necessary to regulate practice and to enhance research involving 
advanced practice nursing. Education of physicians, nurses and the public 
about the role of the advanced practice nurse is also necessary.

