Patient-Consumer Perceptions and Responses to Professional Nursing Care: 
Instrument Development

Mary B. Killeen

The purpose of the study is to develop instruments to assist nurse researchers 
and nurse managers in the measurement of patient satisfaction with nursing 
care. This research will provide quality care of indices and will enable the 
nursing profession to target efforts for educating the public about nurses and 
nursing care. King's (1981) conceptual framework guides this survey research. 
Perception, is of major importance to the conceptualization of patient-
consumer perceptions and responses to professional nursing care. In addition, 
King has used patient terms in identifying four roles of nurses which form the 
proposed dimensions of the perceptions instruments: care giver, teacher, 
friend, and advocate.

Research questions address the reliability and validity estimation of the 
proposed six instruments which will be presented as an approximately 60 item 
questionnaire. Item analysis and internal consistency reliability will be 
addressed in both the initial testing and instrument refinement phases. Test-
retest reliability will be conducted on a sub-sample in the overall study. 
Validity estimation will include face, content, and construct validity 
(convergent-divergent, and exploratory factor analysis). The target population 
is adult patients (perinatal, surgical, medical) who are discharged from 
inpatient units of urban, suburban, and rural Michigan hospitals. Power 
analysis indicated a sample size of 960 subjects is needed (50% response 
expected).

