Prevalence of Childhood Lead Poisoning in Non-Urban Areas of Wisconsin and 
Associated Risk Factors

Marjorie J. Coons

Lead poisoning (>10 microgram/dl) is the most common environmental disease of 
children under age six. Blood levels as low as 10 microgram/dl, once thought 
to be safe, are associated with behavioral, cognitive, and developmental 
consequences that if uncorrected may result in permanent cognitive deficits, 
anemia, and kidney damage. Preliminary findings described the prevalence of 
lead poisoning in nonurban areas of Wisconsin and examined risk factors for 
lead poisoning. During the study period (7-1-94 to 6-30-95), there were 26,482 
children ages 6-71 months old who were screened. The prevalence of lead 
poisoning ranges from a low of 1/1,000 children in Calumet and Chippewa 
counties to a high of 59/1,000 children in Rock county. Using state laboratory 
data (n=24,130), 15.9% of children who were screened tested positive, which is 
nearly twice the national rate of 9%. The highest percentages of positive 
screenings occurred in Marathon (31.4%), La Crosse (28.2%), Sheboygan (28.0%), 
and Rock (25.0%) counties. Statistically significant increased risks were 
associated with being a toddler (12-35 months) (Odds Ratios (OR) = 1.3), male 
gender (OR = 1.25), black race (OR = 2.6), and socioeconomic status (OR = 
1.9). For the final analyses, these findings will be compared to data from the 
urban counties of Milwaukee and Racine. These preliminary findings, 
nonetheless, indicate that lead poisoning is a significant threat to the 
health of young children in rural counties throughout Wisconsin. These 
findings will be used to set priorities for lead screening in Wisconsin and 
will serve as baseline data for county and statewide childhood lead poisoning 
prevention programs.

