Risk Factors for Falling Among Psychiatric Inpatients

Yun-Fang Tsai

Although risk factors for falling have been identified in a variety of patient 
populations, researchers have paid little attention to falls among psychiatric 
patients. Using Hendrich's Fall Risk Model as a guide, the purposes of this 
descriptive study were (a) to document the prevalence of previously identified 
risk factors for falls in a group of acutely ill psychiatric patients, (b) to 
determine if patients who fell differed from non-fallers with respect to risk 
factors, and (c) to describe the circumstances surrounding falls that occurred 
on the unit. All patients admitted to an acute psychiatric unit during a six 
month period were entered into the study (N=192). Twice a day, nurses who 
worked on the unit completed a fall risk factors checklist for each patient. 
This checklist was derived from Hendrich's model and research on falls among 
psychiatric patients. When a fall occurred, nurses completed an additional 
instrument designed to measure circumstances associated with the fall. Among 
all of the patients, the most frequently occurring risk factors were a 
clinical diagnosis of depression and confusion or disorientation. Twelve 
patients fell during their hospitalization. Compared to non-fallers, patients 
who fell were more likely to have a previous history of falls, generalized 
weakness, confusion or disorientation, difficulty with mobility or walking, 
and elimination problems. Analysis of circumstances surrounding falls revealed 
that the majority of falls occurred when patients were attempting to get out 
of bed or walk to the bathroom at night. Findings from this research can be 
used to identify psychiatric patients who are at risk for falls during their 
hospitalization.

