The Relationship Between Cervical Cancer Screening and Provider Type, Provider 
Willingness, and Availability of Service

Carolyn Bryant

According to the US Preventative Service Task Force (1994) approximately 
15,000 new cases of cervical cancer and 4,600 deaths from cervical cancer are 
estimated per year in the US. Effectiveness of early detection of cervical 
cancer through Pap smear testing has been well documented in the literature. 
In spite of this effectiveness, there is still a large population of women who 
are not screened. Factors that affect the use of cancer screening programs by 
women include among others, type of provider, provider willingness to perform 
screening, socio-economic status and age, especially middle-aged and elderly 
women. The purpose of this descriptive correlational study is to determine if 
provider type, provider willingness and availability (financial compensation) 
are associated with increased participation in cervical cancer screening of 
middle-aged and elderly women (ages 40-75). The theoretical perspective used 
for this study is case management theory, a combination of primary health care 
and self care theory. A convenience sample of 100 women will be obtained 
through contacts at a health promotion booth in a shopping mall in 
Northeastern Ohio. Data regarding cervical cancer screening, provider type, 
willingness to perform screening and availability of services will be 
gathered. Contingency tables will be developed and measures of association 
will be used to examine the relationship between the use of cervical cancer 
screening tests and provider type, willingness and availability. Findings from 
the study can shed light on the importance of factors that promote cervical 
cancer screening. It is also anticipated this study will provide used 
information to assist clinicians in the early detection of cervical cancer.

