The Relationship Between Definition of Health and Practice of Health Promoting 
Behaviors of Individuals

Leann Whyte

Rising health care costs and the prevalence of preventable diseases in the 
U.S. have prompted health care providers and the government to focus on the 
promotion of health. How individuals define health may be an important factor 
in what behaviors they perform to maintain their health. Pender's Health 
Promotion Model is the framework for this study that examined the definition 
of health and practice of health promoting behaviors in a convenience sample 
of 105 predominantly Caucasian men and women. Subjects were given the Laffrey 
Health Conception Scale, which assesses the definition of health as clinical 
(absence of illness), role performance (ability to perform one's expected 
roles), adaptive (adapting and interacting with the environment), or 
eudaimonistic (feeling of well-being and exuberance); the Health Promoting 
Lifestyle Profile, which measures health promoting behaviors; a subjective 
health rating scale; and a fill in question asking subjects what they do to 
maintain their health. There was a significant relationship between the 
practice of health promoting behaviors and those who defined health as role 
performance (r=.1948) or eudaimonistic (r=.2067) compared with those who 
defined it as clinical or adaptive (p<.05). Other significant findings showed 
that women (r=.2356) and subjects with more education (r=.2228) scored more 
eudaimonistically (p<.05). Participants who defined health as role 
performance, adaptive, and eudaimonistic rated their health higher than those 
who defined it clinically. Gaining an understanding about factors that 
influence what behavior client's do to maintain or enhance their health is 
crucial for nurses, in order to facilitate the setting of mutual health care 
goals.

