Women's Cognitive Models of the Pre-Treatment State I Breast Cancer Illness 
Experience

Brenda D. Brown

Breast cancer has emerged in recent years as a major public health problem 
affecting 1 in every 8 women over their life time. The body of knowledge 
concerned with women's psychological responses to breast cancer reveals little 
about the subjective illness experience and its impact on personal responses 
from the affected woman's point of view. The purpose of this study is to 
explore a woman's subjective pre-treatment Stage 1 breast cancer illness 
experience and related courses of reported prescriptive and nonprescriptive 
health care action in a nonrandom sample (n=10) of middle-age, middle-income, 
American-born, Caucasian women from their perspective. Donnelly's Cognitive 
Models of Reality provides the conceptual framework for study methodology. 
Data collection will employ audio-tape recorded, subject-structured interviews 
conducted face-to-face and by telephone after the treatment decision is made, 
but prior to treatment implementation. Verbatim audio-taped transcripts will 
be systematically examined to identify each subject's ideas, opinions, 
thoughts, and interpretations of her breast cancer illness experience, in 
terms of its personal and interpersonal significance, and identify actual and 
anticipated health care actions and their significance. Data will be examined 
for a relationship between personal health care actions and cognitive models 
of the illness experience. Findings may offer insight into the range of health 
care activities that women employ during the pretreatment phase of the disease 
and their significance in facilitating personal psychological adjustment to 
having breast cancer. Findings may further suggest nursing strategies that 
would enable affected women to effectively use health care personnel and 
information resources to address their breast cancer illness related concerns.

