The Incidence and Mortality Rate of Chronic Rejection in Lung Transplant 
Patients

Nancy M. Spector, M. Connolly, S. Li, E. Garrity, A. Montoya, and A. Husain

Chronic rejection in lung transplant (LT) patients is manifested as 
obliterative bronchiolitis (OB) and is the most common cause of late deaths 
(>180 days) in this population. Retrospective chart reviews were done on all 
LTs (including heart and lung) performed since 1986 (N=141) to study the 
incidence and mortality of OB. (Error rate on the accuracy of chart data 
retrieval < 7%.) LT pts with OB were matched to those w/o OB, on age, gender, 
diagnosis, and date/type of LT; however, the heart-lung (HLT) sample was too 
small for matching. Twenty-one percent (29/141) of the LTs had histologically 
proven OB, which occurred at a mean of 478 days (+379) post LT. The incidence 
of OB was not significantly different in the 3 types of LTs: single-lung 
(SLT)=22% (16/74); bilateral-lung (BLT)=17% (9/52); HLT=27% (4/15). Gender was 
not significantly different across the 3 groups. However, there was a 
significant difference (p<.05) between the groups for age (SLT 55+7.5; DLT 
32+13; HLT 34+16), probably because SLTs are usually done for COPD, while the 
other 2 types are done on younger pts (eg cystic fibrosis). Mortality rates 
were significantly different (p=.0008) in SLT pts with OB (71%) and matched 
controls w/o OB (7%), but not significantly different in BLT pts with OB (25%) 
and w/o OB (12.5%). Therefore, BLT pts may have better pre-op respiratory 
reserve than SLT, perhaps due to age or pre-op diagnosis. Future nursing 
research needs to identify predictors of better outcomes on LT pts with OB.

