Predicting Risk of Postoperative Atelectasis/Pneumonia After Abdominal Surgery

Jo Ann Brooks-Brunn

Following abdominal surgery, postoperative atelectasis and pneumonia are 
frequent and associated with increased morbidity and mortality, hospital 
length of stay and resource utilization. The purpose of this prospective model 
building study was to determine which combination of risk factors best 
predicted the development of atelectasis/pneumonia following abdominal 
surgery. A multi-criteria definition of atelectasis/pneumonia was used and 15 
risk factors were assessed. Data collection included a preoperative interview 
and chest exam followed by daily subject interviews, chest exams and chart 
reviews on postoperative days 1-6. A sample of 561 subjects was accrued at 4 
institutions and the incidence of postoperative atelectasis/pneumonia was 
22.5%. The sample was split using a randomized stratified technique into a 
model development set (n=400) and model validation set (n=161). Fifteen risk 
factors with a p < .10 were identified in the zero order correlations of risk 
factor and outcome. Using logistic regression modeling techniques, 6 risk 
factors were included in the final model: age > 65 years, BMI > 27, impaired 
preoperative cognition, history of cancer, current smoker within the past 8 
weeks, and surgical incision location. Utility of the model was assessed by 
correct classification (78.5%), sensitivity (23.3%) and specificity (94.5%). 
The Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness of Fit Test for the 6 factor model was 5.9029 
(p=.5511) demonstrating that the model is a good fit over the range of 
probabilities 00.0-1.0. Validation of the model is in process with a sample of 
260 subjects (n=161 validation set + 100 new subjects).

