Preoperative Morphine is Key in Attenuating Surgery-Induced Increases in Tumor 
Metastasis

Gayle C. Page and Shamgar Ben-Eliyahu

We have previously shown that analgesic doses of morphine (MOR) attenuate 
surgery-induced increases in tumor metastasis. This study explored the 
relative importance of pre- vs postoperative MOR treatments in this paradigm. 
Natural killer cells control the metastasis of MADB106 tumor cells, a 
syngeneic mammary adenocarcinoma, in the lungs. Rats underwent either surgery 
or anesthesia, MOR or its vehicle (VEH) was administered to all rats at 3 
times: (1) 30 min preoperatively, (2) the end of surgery, and (3) 5h 
postoperatively. Surgery groups included: surgery/VEH, surgery/MOR (MOR at 
times 1-3), surgery/before (MOR at time 1), surgery/after (MOR at times 2-3), 
and surgery/after-total (MOR at times 2 [plus preoperative dose]-3). 
Anesthesia groups received either MOR or VEH at times 1-3. At 5h 
postoperative, all rats were injected with radiolabeled MADB106 tumor cells 
(tail vein), and lungs were removed 14h later to assess their radioactive 
content. Surgery resulted in a 2-fold increase in tumor cell retention which 
was significantly attenuated in all surgery groups receiving MOR. Moreover, 
the groups receiving preoperative MOR benefitted from the MOR treatment more 
than those receiving MOR only after surgery, and were the only groups that 
were not significantly higher than the anesthesia/VEH group. These results 
imply that although postoperative MOR is beneficial,the preoperative 
administration of MOR is key in optimizing its attenuating effects on surgery-
induced enhancement of metastasis.

