Attitudes Toward Menstruation Among Women in Urban Area of China

Mei-yu Yu, Nancy Reame, Xiu-lan Zhu, and Yu-ying Wu

In light of the belief that attitudes can influence the perception of disease 
or any body function, it has been questioned if cultural variations in 
attitudes toward menstruation have an impact on menstrual distress. In order 
to explore the influence of attitudes toward menstruation on menstrual-related 
symptoms among women in China, the Brooks-Gunn and Ruble's Menstrual Attitude 
Questionnaire was modified for cultural relevance and administered to 322 
healthy women aged 24 to 42 years randomly selected from an urban area of 
China. Four factors were generated from the exploratory factor analysis. The 
mean scores for these factors from highest to lowest were 5.4 for the factor 
named "menstruation as a natural event" (based on a 7-point scale with 
1=disagree strongly and 7=agree strongly), 4.6 for "anticipation and 
prediction of the event", 4.4 for "menstruation as a debilitating event", and 
3.4 for "denial of the effects". The women who had a higher level of education 
were more likely to agree with anticipation and prediction of the event 
(p=.003) and less likely to deny the effects of menstruation (p=.009). Of the 
322 participants, 58 women filled out the questionnaire again during the 
following menstrual cycle. The test-retest reliability coefficients ranged 
from a low of .65 to a high of .80 (p=.000) for the four factors. Our finding 
that the Chinese participants scored highest on menstruation as a natural 
event is similar to the finding from a group of Indian women studied by 
Chandra & Chaturvedi (1992). Further exploration of cultural variations in 
attitudes toward menstruation and their impacts on perception of menstrual 
symptoms should enrich our knowledge of the etiology of perimenstrual symptoms 
of Chinese women as well as women of other cultures.

