Menopausal Transition: The Learning Needs and Resources of Women in Midlife

Janice DeMasters

Every woman who lives long enough will experience the perimenopausal 
transition, a naturally occurring phenomena of female aging which bridges the 
time from the climacteric (or beginning of ovarian decline) through the first 
year after the cessation of menses (menopause). Women have cited inconsistent 
information and contrasting advice as a significant problems in this time of 
life. Considering these issues, identifying learning; needs and resources of 
this population is a crucial first step in the development of health promotion 
intervention strategies to facilitate positive adaptation through the 
perimenopause and into the menopausal years.

The purpose of this study is to investigate the learning needs of women during 
naturally occurring (as opposed to surgically induced) perimenopause; to 
discover what resources they perceive as available to them and which they 
utilize and what they perceive as deficits in information and support systems. 
Changes in these learning needs and resources from perimenopause to 
postmenopause are also addressed.

This ongoing study uses a grounded theory framework with a projected sample of 
20 women. A demographic questionnaire is used followed by a tape-recorded 
interview. The core theme emerging from the data is "relying on the familiar" 
as women turn to women's magazines, church publications and peer discussion as 
prime information resources and guidelines for establishing "norms." Support 
systems often center on peers who are also peri or postmenopausal. Emerging 
theory reveals a disturbing trend toward discontinuing routine gynecological 
checkups when health care providers discount or belittle women's symptoms and 
concerns. Mamograms are continued, however, because they do not require 
physician referral.

