Effects of Empathy on Appraisal, Coping, and Caregiving Outcomes in Informal 
Caregivers

Haejung S. Lee and Patricia F. Brennan

Statement of problem: The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of 
caregiver empathy on the appraisal of caregiving transaction, coping, and 
caregiving outcomes. Empathy has been identified as an important ingredient in 
professional helping relationships, but very little is known of the influence 
of empathy in caregiving. Attempts to examine the influence of empathy on the 
caregivers produced inconsistent results because of the conceptual and 
methodological problems. Using Lazarus and Folkman model, empathy is proposed 
as a critical personal characteristic which influences appraisal.

Theoretical Framework: To understand the positive or negative impacts of 
caregiving demands on caregivers, the stress model of Lazarus and Folkman was 
proposed. The model emphasizes cognitive appraisal which is determined by 
personal characteristics and mediates emotional and somatic reactions. In this 
study, empathy is posited to influence cognitive appraisal. Since cognitive 
appraisal rests on individual's subjective interpretation of a transaction, 
empathy has critical influence on the appraisal. This relationship will be 
examined.

Method: Using self-report questionnaires, 100 informal caregivers of elders 
aged over 60 will be recruited from the Greater Cleveland Arc Pearson 
correlation and multiple regression will be done to see the relationships 
between variables and the effects of empathy on the appraisals and outcomes.

Results: The poster will include descriptives of the variables, correlational 
matrix and multiple regression tables.

Implications: This study would trigger nursing intervention to facilitate 
caregiver's inner resource, such as empathy, to cope effectively with the 
caregiving environment, which enhances the possibility for the dependent 
elders to stay in the community.

