Gender Comparisons of Functional Ability and Quality of Life One Year 
Following CABG

Shirley M. Moore

Because women have been shown to have reduced functional abilities following 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) as compared to men, understanding 
gender differences in perceived quality of life (QOL) is particularly 
important. Using Ferrans and Powers' multi-dimensional conceptualization of 
QOL, a correlational survey design was used to compare women's and men's 
functional ability and QOL 1 year following CABG. A convenience sample of 51 
individuals (20 women and 31 men) (mean age=66 yrs) who had undergone first 
CABG surgery 1 year previously, provided information about QOL using the 
Ferrans and Powers' Quality of Life Index and functional ability using the 
Sickness Impact Profile (SIP). Women reported worse physical functioning than 
men (F=9.62; p<.05) and the difference held after controlling for age. Using 
Analysis of Covariance and controlling for age, physical functioning, and 
social activities, no differences were found in women's and men's perceptions 
of QOL. Older persons perceived significantly better QOL (F=5.78; p<.05) and 
difficulty in physical functioning negatively influenced (F=5.7; p<.05) QOL. 
Multiple regression analyses indicated that age, existence of chronic 
problems, social functioning, physical functioning and gender together 
explained 31% of the variance in perceived QOL (F=5.14, p<.05). These findings 
suggest that although women report worse physical functioning than men, they 
may diminish the effects of adverse physical functioning on overall QOL.

