Perceived Health and Functional Status and Coping Measures of Individuals with 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Dianne M. Smolen

The purpose of this study is to investigate, from an outcome measurement 
standpoint, the perceived effect of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) on the 
health and functional status of affected individuals as well as the coping 
behaviors of these individuals. IBD, specifically Crohn's disease and 
ulcerative colitis, is a chronic, incurable condition causing pain, fever and 
weight loss. The literature reflects numerous studies discussing the impact of 
IBD on affected individuals (Kinash, et al., 1993; Love, et al., 1992). 
However, it does not discuss the perceived effect of IBD on the health and 
functional status of affected individuals from an outcome measurement 
standpoint. Outcomes are the results of effectiveness of health care delivery. 
Information is also scarce about coping behaviors of individuals with IBD in 
relation to the outcome measures of health and functional status (Kinash, et 
al., 1993). The concept of coping as defined by Lazarus (1980) is used as a 
framework for this descriptive, comparative study. The sample of at least 50 
patients will be drawn from patients who attend a gastroenterology clinic at a 
university teaching hospital. Data will be collected using the Health Status 
Questionnaire, the Jaloweic Coping Scale, and a researcher-designed 
Demographic Data Questionnaire. Data will be analyzed using descriptive 
statistics, ANOVA, and Pearson correlations. Information about how individuals 
with IBD cope successfully with their chronic illness may assist health 
professionals to support effective coping strategies.

