How Children Perceive Their Neighborhood: A Survey of Inner City Elementary 
School Youth

Barbara J. Polivka, Barbara Smith, and Marian Lovell

Youth living in inner city areas are exposed to numerous potentially 
detrimental individuals and experiences. The purpose of this survey was to 
assess how inner city elementary school youths viewed their neighborhood. This 
study was based on the CDC community action framework for the prevention of 
youth violence in which community members develop violence prevention 
activities appropriate for their area. Individuals associated with an inner 
city elementary school determined that information was needed on youths 
perceptions of where they lived, played, and went to school. Subsequently, the 
Kidsplace survey was administered to 223 second to 5th graders and a modified 
version was given to 156 Kindergarten (K) and 1st graders. Students were asked 
to name (2nd-5th grade) or draw (K-1st grade) one person, place, or thing that 
select word reminded them of. Youth ranged in age from 5 to 12 and were 
primarily African-American (72%). Data were analyzed using content analysis. 
Thirty-six percent identified a violent event as making them sad ("when my dad 
got shot", "drive-bys"); 20% identified home or family as their source of 
sadness; 55% stated they felt safe at home or with family, while 11% 
identified school as the safest place. Forty-six percent of younger youth 
noted that home or family events were their source of happiness. Findings from 
this study can be used as a index to understanding how youth perceive their 
neighborhood and to plan future violence prevention interventions at the 
community level.

