Dyspnea and Anxiety in Patients with COPD: The Potential Role of Music

Sandra McBride, J. Graydon, S. Sidani, and L. Hall
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating disorder that 
is frequently characterized by feelings of dyspnea and/or anxiety. There are 
relatively few studies examining interventions aimed directly at the relief of 
dyspnea and anxiety. Music has been found to reduce anxiety and promote 
relaxation in populations other than individuals with COPD. The purpose of 
this longitudinal study is to determine the feasibility of examining the 
effect of music on the anxiety and dyspnea of patients with COPD who are 
living at home where the use of music is initiated and applied by subjects at 
their convenience. Martha Rogers' (1986) science of unitary human beings will 
be used as the broad underpinning of the study. A convenience sample of 30 
subjects with a diagnosis of COPD who report experiencing dyspnea at least 
once a day will be recruited. Measures of anxiety, current dyspnea, 
demographic profile, music preference, and music use and effect will be 
collected during a five week period. Anxiety will be measured by the 
Spielberger (1970) state anxiety scale. Dyspnea will be measured by both a 
visual analogue scale and a dyspnea rating scale. Descriptive statistics will 
be used to determine 1) the socio-demographic and illness-related 
characteristics; 2) the subjects' use of music; 3) the frequency of 
experiencing dyspnea and the frequency of music use over the three week 
period; and 4) the intensity of perceived dyspnea before and after music, over 
the three week period. Chi square goodness-of-fit test will be computed to 
determine if telephone interviews will yield as complete data as home 
interviews. Pearson correlation will be calculated to determine the 
relationship between the dyspnea rating scale and the visual analogue scale.

