Prevalence, Characteristics, and Impact of Postmastectomy Pain Syndrome: An 
Investigation of Women's Experiences

Patricia E. Stevens

Postmastectomy pain (PMP), a distinctive, but poorly understood postsurgical 
neuropathic pain syndrome, results from injury to the intercostobrachial nerve 
during breast cancer surgery. It is thought to occur in 4 to 6% of axillary 
node dissections during lumpectomy, modified radical mastectomy, or radical 
mastectomy. The syndrome is under-studied and generally misdiagnosed. The 
purposes of this cross-sectional descriptive study were to determine PMP 
prevalence, describe the characteristics of the pain, and identify its impact 
on the lives of women with PMP. A convenience sample of 95 women oncology 
outpatients who had undergone breast cancer surgery was recruited from 16 
ambulatory care sites. Instruments included a medical record review form, 
patient information questionnaire, cancer pain questionnaire, and the McGill 
Pain Questionnaire. A 20% prevalence rate of postmastectomy pain syndrome was 
found, suggesting that PMP may affect considerably more women who have had 
breast cancer surgery than previously thought. Women experiencing the syndrome 
reported chronic, often severe pain of long duration. They had paroxysms of 
lancinating pain against a background of burning, aching, tight constriction 
in the axilla, medial upper arm, and/or chest that significantly interfered 
with performance of daily occupational and domestic activities. They were 
undertreated and their symptoms poorly relieved. Implications for surgical 
technique, diagnosis, treatment, and care are discussed.

