Clinical Testing of the Weaning Readiness Assessment Scale

Anne G. Perry and Patricia Dettenmeier

This was a prospective study designed to further test the Weaning Readiness 
Assessment Scale's (WRAS) ability to identify and categorize factors which 
impeded or promoted a patient's ability to successfully wean from mechanical 
ventilation (N=295). This phase of the study was designed to determine 1) the 
continuous reliability of the WRAS, 2) replication of the results on a larger 
prospective sample, and 3) if, through a linear regression model, there exists 
an interaction of multiple variables with one another and together to 
influence the number of days on mechanical ventilation.

As previously reported the WRAS is a 28 item, 60 point scale used to assess 
the patients' physiological, behavioral, and ventilatory variables. Previous 
research documents acceptable inter-rater reliability (0.93), intra-rater 
reliability (0.92), and content validity index (0.88). Earlier clinical 
testing identified a significance difference in the total scores of patients 
who successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation when compared to those 
patients who were unsuccessful. In addition 14 variables were identified as 
significant for successful weaning.

Preliminary one-way analysis of variance showed statistical significance on 
similar variables; and with other instances where statistical significance was 
not present, but where a trend was obvious in the means. Further analysis is 
in progress to complete contingency table analyses and to develop a linear 
regression model on the data from the two data sets for a total of 524 
subjects.

These data imply that certain variables, alone and in combination affect 
successful weaning from mechanical ventilation. Future testing of this model 
may reveal that the WRAS can be effective clinical assessment to identify 
readiness to wean.

