Factors Related to Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnancy

Glenda N. Lindseth

Greater than 50,000 women in the U.S. alone are hospitalized for nausea and 
vomiting in pregnancy (Hintilian, 1993), and an approximate four million 
pregnant women will experience some form of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy 
(NVP) each year. While early (< 20 weeks) of NVP may be associated with 
positive outcomes, the outcomes of late (> or = 20 weeks) of NVP are less 
certain and have been associated with decreased birth weight and dehydration 
of the mother. This study, conceptualized with Orem's Theory of Self-Care 
Deficit, analyzes those factors that may be related to experiences of NVP. 
Nausea and vomiting experience scores of 50 randomly selected pregnant women 
were determined by using the Rhodes Nausea and Vomiting Symptom Distress Scale 
and compared to demographic, anthropometric, and dietary intake variables for 
each subject. Self-care agency and quality of life scores were also measured 
for relationships to the nausea and vomiting experiences. When comparing 
dietary intakes of groups of women experiencing NVP and those women 
asymptomatic for NVP, significant differences emerged between nutrient intakes 
of ascorbic acid (F=5.1, p=.05), kilo calories (F=7.3, p=.02), cholesterol 
(F=79.2, p<.001), protein (F=6.1, p=.03), carbohydrate (F=23.3, p.001), and 
fat (F=18.3, p=.002). There were NS differences in NVP experience scores for 
early pregnancy when compared to late pregnancy, yet anthropometric measures 
differed significantly when considering the nausea and vomiting. Several other 
significant demographic and health risk variables emerged. This study has 
implications for developing nursing interventions to improve the health and 
wellbeing of pregnant women who may be experiencing nausea and vomiting.

