Predictors of Psychological Well-Being During Pregnancy: A Comparison of 
Canadian and U.S. Women

Rachel Zachariah

The purpose of this study was to explore the phenomena of attachment 
relationships and social support of women during pregnancy and their influence 
on their psychological well-being. The attachment with one's mother was 
perceived as prototype for later relationships and social interactions, which 
also influence the individual's psychological well-being (Bowlby, 1988). The 
study design represented passive observational approach. The sample consisted 
of 115 Canadian and 118 U.S. women who were married, living with husbands, 
between 18 and 39 years of age, expecting their first liveborn infant, 28 
weeks or greater gestation, and without any medical conditions. Multiple 
correlational and regression techniques were used to analyze data derived from 
self-completed structured questionnaires. The hypothesis that mother-daughter 
and husband-wife attachment have positive correlations, was supported for both 
samples (Canadian, r=.24 P<.01; U.S., r=.7956, P<.001). Mother-daughter, 
husband-wife attachment, and the age of the subject accounted for 36% of the 
total variability in psychological well-being for the Canadian sample. For the 
U.S. sample, 8% of the total variability in psychological well-being was 
explained by life-stress, emotional support and total number in the network. 
The fundings of the Canadian study confirmed that the attachment relationships 
with mother and husband had an impact upon the woman's psychological 
well-being. For the U.S. sample, however, the significant predictors of 
psychological well-being were life-stress, emotional support and total number 
in the network. The significant positive correlation between mother-daughter 
and husband-wife attachment during pregnancy is an important finding in 
planning for care and identifying risks in the emotional health of women 
during pregnancy.

