Acute Confusion in Hospitalized Elderly Veterans

Bonnie Wakefield

This study will establish estimates of the prevalence, incidence, risk factors 
for and short term outcomes of acute confusion (AC) in hospitalized elderly 
veterans (HEV). The specific aims are to: 1) establish estimates of the 
prevalence and incidence of AC in HEV; 2) identify risk factors associated 
with the incidence of AC in HEV; 3) determine whether patients with AC during 
hospitalization experience more adverse outcomes while hospitalized, compared 
to non-confused patients; and 4) determine whether the clinical and resource 
outcomes are different between patients experiencing AC during hospitalization 
compared to non-confused patients. The ultimate goal of this study is to 
develop a better understanding of the nature, extent, and clinical and 
resource importance of AC in HEV.

The study uses a prospective cohort design, with a sample drawn from patients, 
age 65 and older admitted to 1 of 3 medical wards at a midwestern VAMC, who 
have a predicted length of stay greater than 48 hours. Within 24 hours of 
admission, eligible patients are screened. Following consent procedures, 
eligible patients are assessed with the MMSE, NEECHAM scale for acute 
confusion, Geriatric Depression Scale, and the Clock Drawing Test. Demographic 
data, risk factors, and outcomes are collected on admission and during the 
course of the subject's stay in the hospital. Patients are followed for 8 days 
following admission; patients confused on admission or who become confused 
during their hospital stay are assessed daily until the confusion clears or 
discharge. At three and six months after discharge, VA records will be 
reviewed for data on mortality and readmissions. Data analysis will include 
descriptive statistics, calculation of prevalence and cumulative incidence 
rates, odds ratios, multiple logistic regression, ANOVA, and Chi-square.

