Acute Confusion in Elderly Long-Term Care Veterans: A Pilot Study

Kennith Culp, Bonnie Wakefield, Karen Wadle, and Jackie Akins

This study was designed to test data collection procedures to establish the 
incidence of acute confusion (AC) among elderly veterans who live in long term 
care (LTC) settings. Specific aims were to: 1) test instruments to assess AC 
in this setting; 2) identify the most common risk factors associated with AC; 
and 3) estimate clinical profiles of acutely confused veterans in LTC. Using a 
longitudinal design and incorporating diurnal patterns of acute confusional 
states into the methodology, both evening and daytime assessments of cognitive 
functioning were completed. Subjects were screened with the mini-mental state 
exam. We then administered instruments specific to AC and measured intake and 
output, daily ratings of sleep and pain, serum electrolytes, and oxygen 
hemoglobin saturation with a non-invasive pulse oximeter. Subjects were deemed 
eligible if they were: 1) 65 years of age or older, 2) not located on a 
residential care unit, and 3) did not have a psychiatric diagnosis (with the 
exception of substance abuse). Of those deemed eligible, 36 subjects agreed to 
participate from two VA institutions. Using a NEECHAM score < 24 as the case 
ascertainment criteria, 15 subjects (41.2%) experienced acute confusion during 
the observation period. Possible antecedent conditions for these episodes 
include urinary tract infection, serum electrolyte imbalance, hypotension, 
hypoxia, and medication-induced delirium. The probable etiologies for these 
events suggest clinical implications for vigilant monitoring of high-risk 
residents in LTC, comprehensive staff education for assessment, and prevention 
strategies to offset the occurrence of fluid and electrolyte imbalances.

