Training of Acute Confusion Resource Nurses: Knowledge, Efficacy and Role

Carla Gene Rapp, Karen Wadle, and Marge Hedstrom

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of an educational program 
on participants' knowledge of acute confusion and their level of confidence in 
assessing acutely confused patients. The first phase of the acute 
confusion/delirium study identified a need for education of staff regarding 
etiology, differentiation between delirium and dementia, and assessment 
protocols for delirium. Each participating facility identified unit-based 
resource nurses willing to develop expertise in the assessment of acute 
confusion using the mini- mental state exam (MMSE), the NEECHAM confusion 
scale, and the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). Eighty-five resource nurses 
participated in an 8 hour workshop with both didactic and experiential 
components. Using a theoretical framework of self-efficacy, nurses first 
observed and then participated in role plays to gain skill and confidence in 
assessing acutely confused patients. The resource nurse is prepared to 
function in the role of expert in the assessment of acute confusion, and to 
develop the skills of peers in assessing acute confusion. A 12 item test 
related to knowledge of acute confusion and a 10 item assessment of perceived 
level of confidence in assessing acutely confused patients was administered 
before and after completion of the program. Data were analyzed using a series 
of descriptive and inferential statistical procedures. Following the day-long 
workshop, field checks were done at each participating facility with 85% of 
the participants. The 88 participants showed significant (p<.05) improvement 
in knowledge and level of confidence after the educational intervention.

