Charted Nursing Interventions Grouped by Nursing Interventions Classification 
(NIC) Compared Classified Medicus Indicators and Defined Functional Care 
Categories for Patients on Total Hip Replacement (DRG 209) and PTCA (DRG 112) 
Clinical Pathways

L. Sue Davis, Linda L. Workman, and Darlene A. Anderson

This study was undertaken in conjunction with a larger, multi-institutional 
consortium research project to validate nursing interventions in support of 
the NIC and Medicus indicators, and the direct care costs based on these 
intervention. A descriptive design examined the relationship between a patient 
classification system (Medicus Type VI) acuity score and documented nursing 
interventions for patients participating in a clinical pathway for DRGs 209, 
total hip replacement, and 112, PTCA. A random sample of 40 patient medical 
records was obtained from a 707 bed academic medical center located in a 
midwestern state. Data were collected using a coding instrument developed by 
the researchers which incorporated revised Medicus acuity indicators, nursing 
interventions categories (NIC) derived from the Iowa Intervention Project, and 
nursing interventions based on standards of care and the clinical pathways 
expectations. Descriptive statistical analysis was completed using an 
analytical tree concept with the documented nursing interventions as the basis 
for generating NIC and Medicus scores. In addition, Medicus categories coded 
daily by the staff nurse were transformed into two binary codes, 0=absent and 
1=present, to enable comparison of documented to coded Medicus indicators per 
patient group. Results revealed that nursing interventions were found to 
support both NIC and Medicus categories and clinical pathways standards 
established for the 2 DRGs.

