Translating Nursing Orders into the Nursing Interventions Classification 
(NIC): Process and Rules

Sue Moorhead and Connie Delaney

Uniform language in nursing is needed to clearly depict the contributions of 
nursing in the health care arena. Standardized language provides a way to 
describe nursing care, to determine nursing's contribution to outcomes and to 
measure the quality of that contribution to patient care. Standardized 
language for nursing diagnoses is commonly used in nursing practice and 
provides a framework for evaluation of care, but little data related to 
nursing interventions and patient outcomes are standardized. This situation in 
nursing practice today limits out ability to describe nursing practice and the 
patient outcomes achieved in spite of the fact that many hospitals collect 
these data. This study integrates the feasibility of translating 
nonstandardized nursing intervention data into standardized intervention 
language using the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC). The study is 
based on data from a midwest community hospital's computerized information 
system. A method for translating the nursing orders from the discharge records 
of 4,248 patient records from April through October 1990 was developed that 
aligned each nursing order with the appropriate nursing intervention from the 
NIC. The rules created for this translation will be outlined. Examples of 
nursing interventions linked to NANDA diagnoses identified as a result of this 
translation process provide a "picture" of nursing practice in this hospital 
that was not available previously. The results of this study demonstrate that 
nonstandardized nursing orders can be translated into standardized nursing 
intervention language such as the Nursing Interventions Classification.

