Translating Nursing Interventions from a Hospital System to the Nursing 
Interventions Classification (NIC)

Amy Coenen, Polly Ryan, and Janice Sutton

The use of standardized classification systems to document nursing practice 
can assist in demonstrating the contributions nurses make in the health care 
arena. The purpose of this project was to compare an existing classification 
system for interventions that was used in a hospital Nursing Information 
System (NIS) with the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC) (McCloskey & 
Bulechek, 1992). This initial project was necessary in order to conduct a 
multi-site study describing nursing care using the Nursing Minimum Data Set 
(NMDS). The hospital NIS classified interventions using the NMDS 16 category 
scheme. For future comparability of translation projects, nursing 
interventions for this project were selected based on the Moorhead and Delaney 
project (another presentation for this symposium). Interventions for select 
nursing diagnoses were used. Members of the research team independently coded 
the select interventions from the hospital NIS to the NIC. Most of hospital 
NIS interventions were comparable at the level of NIC activities, in which 
case the NIC intervention label was used for coding. Alpha levels were < .60 
on coding for the first diagnosis (pain). After determining decision rules for 
additional coding, interventions for pain will be re-coded until an alpha 
level of > .90 is achieved. At that time, interventions for additional 
diagnoses will be translated from the hospital NIS to NIC. Based on the 
findings, a discussion of issues related to development and use of 
classification systems for nursing interventions will be presented.

