Attitudes of Rural Nurses Toward HIV/AIDS

Carol H. Pullen and M. C. Petersen

With the incidence of HIV/AIDS steadily increasing in rural areas, both with 
newly diagnosed cases and persons "coming home to die", nursing care issues in 
rural communities need to be addressed. Previous research has indicated that 
as knowledge about HIV/AIDS and its related issues increase and as attitudes 
become more positive, nurses were more willing and less fearful to care for 
persons with AIDS. The unique characteristics of rural areas may pose 
additional challenges for caring for HIV/AIDS patient in the rural health care 
delivery system. The purpose of this study was to describe the attitudes of 
rural nurses towards HIV/AIDS (in the areas of homosexuality, IV drug users, 
women, nursing care, and social issues) and to determine the relationship of 
age, educational level, AIDS education, experience in care delivery to 
HIV/AIDS patients, and willingness to care for HIV/AIDS patients. A 
descriptive correlational design is being used to collect data from a 
convenience sample of approximately 300 rural nurses (data collection 
progress) attending continuing education programs at 16 rural sites throughout 
the state. Written surveys include a personal data form including selected 
items relating to AIDS education and willingness to care for HIV/AIDS patients 
and Preston's "Opinions About HIV/AIDS and People with AIDS". Data analysis 
will include descriptive statistics, correlation measures, and ANOVAs to 
assess group differences. This study will provide a foundation for the 
development of educational interventions for rural nurses tailored to the 
areas of greatest need (i.e., homosexuality, IV drug users) and to specific 
subgroups of nurses.

