Help-Seeking Patterns in Depressed Rural Women: A Grounded Theory Lens

Vicky M. Fisher

This paper will describe the qualitative method of grounded theory (Glaser & 
Strauss, 1966) in its application to studying patterns of help-seeking in 
rural women with depression. Inherent in the grounded theory method is the 
process of constant comparative analysis (Chenitz & Swanson, 1986). This 
process allows the investigator to alternately engage in data collection and 
data analysis, thus allowing for emergent theoretical development throughout 
the research experience. Constant comparative analysis is especially relevant 
in the attempt to enrich our understanding of health care delivery for 
"marginalized populations" (Hall, Stevens, & Meleis, 1994) as it actively 
includes these consumer voices in the process of expanded knowing. The 
grounded theory strategy will be described and critiqued using Morgan's 
analytic framework of research evaluation (Morgan, 1983). In Morgan's model, 
the evaluative research process is applied with particular emphasis given to 
modes of engagement between research investigator and participant. 
Additionally, the conceptual linkages between the constitutive assumptions, 
epistemological stance, and favored methodology of the grounded theory 
strategy will be explored. Vignettes from the author's research will be used 
to illustrate application of the Morgan model, while investigating an 
historically marginalized population of rural women with depression. Sequelae 
and consequences of the research process will be described, as the writer 
poses potential clinical and ethical dilemmas that are uniquely experienced by 
marginalized persons.

