Culture and Conflict: A Casuistic Ethical Analysis in Clinical Psychiatric 
Nursing

Jane H. Dimmitt

The impending impact of health care reform supports the prediction that 
advanced practice nurses will occupy an expanded role in the delivery of 
health care, especially with underserved and rural areas, particularly within 
the field of mental health services. The inherent independent nature of such 
practice environments combined with the pluralism which exists in today's 
multiculral society demand that professional nurses working in these 
circumstances develop and utilize an ethical framework for the analysis of 
patient care in situations that invoke moral conflict.

In the absence of a well articulated conceptual framework for nursing ethics, 
this paper argues for a theory of applied ethics--casuitics--used within a 
clinical reasoning model to analyze the complicated issues presented in a case 
invoking the sexual cultures of violence and polysubstance abuse in 
adolescents receiving treatment for sexually transmitted disease. This 
approach is based on a philosophy that ethics are values--those things that 
are cherished most by individuals in their own lives. Ethics, therefore, 
becomes what each individual encounters and believes. In an effort to 
appreciate such differences, a broader view is required that encompasses and 
acknowledges another's value system.

Casuistry, as a process, recognizes and appreciates the importance 
ofparticular characterittics withn individual cases. As society becomes more 
ethnically diverse and multicutural in character, the potential for existing 
and interpersonal tensions increases. Many challenges to the 
psychiatric/mental health advanced nurse practitioner within the community are 
presented and discussed--dilemmas which are bound to increase in frequency and 
complexity as violence continues within the home and within society.

