Implementing Advance Directives in the Clinical Setting: The Experience of 
Critical Care and Oncology Nurses

Kathryn E. Artnak

The Patient Self-Determination Act of 1990 is a federally mandated law that 
requires health care institutions to make all patients and clients aware of 
state laws regarding advance directives (e.g., living wills). Conceived to 
protect individual choice in medical treatment decision making, particularly 
at the end of life, implementation of this health care policy has become in 
many places another exercise in institutional bureaucracy.

This paper presents the findings from focus group discussion sessions designed 
to elicit the experience of nurses regarding the utility of advance care 
planning documents in the clinical setting. Two clinical sites were purposely 
chosen--the intensive care unit and the oncology unit--due to the probability 
of the presence and subsequent implementation of advance directives (e.g., 
living wills). Analysis of the data showed that conflict often occurred over 
the interpretation of these documents between the physicians, the nurses and 
the families of the patient involved. They describe the effect of an 
overzealous regard for individualism within the context of health care 
decision making, often creating complex, difficult situations of an ethical 
nature where patients and families are often left facing serious illness 
alone, frightened, and without guidance. Such results are troubling for the 
proclaimed purposes of advance directives which are to protect the "best 
interests" of individuals regarding their treatment choices for a time when 
they are unable to speak for themselves.

