Monitoring Fever's Path of Destruction in Home and Hospital

Barbara J. Holtzclaw

The management of febrile symptoms is a significant problem affecting 
virtually all persons living with AIDS (PLWA). While medical management treats 
the underlying infection, nursing fever management is directed at 
symptomatology, regardless of etiology. There are presently no widely held 
standards for care of febrile symptoms. Common approaches that cool patients 
are counterproductive and distressful. Cooling during the chill phase of fever 
evokes warming responses that increase oxygen consumption and 
cardiorespiratory effort. Methods to keep the patient hydrated during fever 
are often implemented after-the-fact, when the patient is severely desiccated. 
A comprehensive study of febrile symptom management was implemented after 
funding by the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR) in 1994. The 
study follows subjects from inpatient hospitalization with febrile illness, to 
home and outpatient status. The need for continuity between measurements made 
in these diverse settings led to communication between hospital and home 
health caregivers. The difference between inpatient sophisticated measurement 
instruments and those used by the patient for self monitoring is addressed. 
The use of home followup as a stimulus for self monitoring is also emphasized. 
Three discrete methodological issues that affect research in febrile symptom 
management are presented in this symposium. They include, monitoring of 
febrile patterns and hydration in hospitalized PLWAs, measurement of shivering 
severity and duration, and cultural and ethnic aspects of home fever 
management in PLWA.

