Predictors of Alcohol Use Among Rural Adolescents

Gwen M. Felton, Mary Ann Parsons, Robert Valois, Russell Pate, Dianne Ward, 
Marsha Dowda, Ruth Saunders, and Stuart Trost

Alcohol use is common in adolescence. Recent studies suggest that use may 
begin as early as age ten. However, less is known about alcohol use during 
early adolescence, particularly among rural youths. This study examined the 
association between risk indicators and alcohol use, including experimental 
use, in a sample (N=336) of fifth graders in two rural school districts in the 
southeast. The students raged in age from 9 to 12 (M=10) and were 53% female 
and 74% African- American. Data were collected using instruments designed to 
assess the health behaviors of students, peers, and family members. 
Approximately 36% (n=122) reported alcohol use. Multiple Logistic regression 
was used to identify risk indicators, i.e., age, gender, race, cigarette 
smoking, physical activity, and alcohol use by parents/surrogates and peer. A 
four factor model resulted. Alcohol use was strongly associated with smoking 
(OR=11.99, 95% CI=5.9, 24.3). Among the sociodemographic variables, male 
gender had an OR of 3.78 (95% CI=2.2, 6.7) and father's alcohol use also 
predicted use (OR=2.75, 95% CI=1.6, 4.8). An odds ratio of 0.73(95% CI=0.5, 
1.03) for physical activity may indicate that students who were more 
physically active were less likely use alcohol. Among users many had only one 
or two episodes, 18% reported weekend and holiday use, and 3% reported weekend 
and weekday use. Of the parental behaviors, only father's alcohol use 
contributed to the model with 72% having fathers who used alcohol. The 
frequency of father's use included "sometimes" (45%) and "a lot" (10%). Almost 
25% reported having tried cigarette smoking with 4% initiating smoking by age 
9 or younger compared to 10% who had used alcohol by the same age. Of alcohol 
"users", 53% also smoked. The findings suggest young adolescents should be 
viewed as active decision-makers within the context of their school, family, 
and community environments, rather than as naive children. The extent of 
alcohol and tobacco use calls for school and community health professionals to 
develop programmatic efforts within a comprehensive school health program, 
including community outreach programs focusing on interventions in rural 
areas.

