Self-Care Actions to Manage Fatiguein Myasthenia Gravis

Mary E. Grohar-Murray and A. Becker

The neuromuscular disease Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is known to produce fatigue, 
it is also the most frequently reported symptom by MG patients (Ochs, 1991). 
Despite fatigue's prevalence, no protocols exist for it's treatment, thus 
patients are left to self-manage. The purpose of this study was to describe 
self-care actions used to manage fatigue among patients with MG. A national 
sample (N=250) of MG patients responded to two structured instruments, The 
Fatigue Survey, (FS), modified with permission of authors Hubsky and Sears; 
and the Myasthenia Gravis Fatigue Scale (MGFS). The theoretical foundation for 
both instruments was based on the construct of fatigue. Subjects identified 
three major categories of self-care actions, 1) mental interventions (76%), 2) 
physical interventions (78%), and 3) rest/sleep (80%). A subset of the 
respondents (N=36) reported using aerobic exercise (usually contradicted with 
MG) to attempt to relieve fatigue with no significant difference found in 
fatigue scores between N=25 reporting aerobic exercise to be helpful with N=11 
finding exercise not helpful. However, those utilizing aerobic exercise 
reported the highest functional status categories. A question arises as to 
cause and effect; that is, is aerobic exercise performed by the least ill MG 
patients, or does aerobic exercise improve functional status? When 
demographic, illness related, and functional status variables were associated 
with fatigue scores, and self-care actions, only gender, and functional status 
were significantly correlated with fatigue score. Effective self-care actions 
include stress reduction techniques, pacing all activities, and increasing 
rest and sleep. Further investigation into the role of aerobic exercise is 
indicated as a self-care action for MG fatigue.

