Alcohol Dependence, Smoking Status, Reproductive Characteristics and Bone 
Density in Premenopausal Women

Kathleen Clark and MaryFran Sowers

Stochastic models developed by Horseman & Burkinshaw demonstrated that 2/3 of 
the risk for fracture in postmenopausal years was determined by the level of 
premenopausal bone density. Alcohol misuse in the premenopausal years, because 
of its adverse affects on osteoblast development and on the reproductive 
system, may retard the attainment of peak bone density. Cigarette smoking, 
common among women who misuse alcohol, may also contribute to lower bone 
density. This study evaluated bone density of the lumbar spine and femoral 
neck, smoking status and selected reproductive characteristics in 50 
premenopausal women, 25 who were alcohol dependent and 25 control subjects, 
matched for age, height and weight. Mean bone density was 6.8% lower at the 
femoral neck and 6.9% lower at the lumbar spine in women who were alcohol 
dependent (p<0.05). Some of that difference may be attributed to cigarette 
smoking. When smoking was controlled through comparison of pairs'concordant on 
smoking status, there was no significant difference in bone mineral density at 
either site. Women who were alcohol dependent were more likely to report 
episodes of non-pregnancy related amenorrhea and to have experienced their 
first pregnancy at age 16 years or younger. These finding suggest that women 
who are alcohol dependent have lower bone density than those who are not. 
Smoking behavior and reproductive characteristics may be considered part of 
the explanation for the difference.

