Influence of Health Perceptions and Hope on Selected Reproductive Health 
Behaviors in Late Adolescent Males

Sara G. Fuller, Terry R. Misener, and Harry F. Sharp III

Health promotion for late adolescent males is a needed but neglected area of 
nursing research. Late adolescent (ages 18-21) is a period of transition from 
family dependence and responsibility to independece and self-responsiblity. 
The reproductive health of young men is of particular importance since they 
are at risk for sexually transmitted diseases, injury, premature parenthood, 
and testicular cnacer: all of whicha re amenable to prevention and early 
detection programs. Using the Kersell/Milsum model of behavioral change, this 
study assessed the influence of general health perception and hope on the 
practice of positive health care practices in men's reproductive health in 
late adolescent males.

Selected at random from the Department of Motor Vehicles roster of licensed 
drivers in a southeastern state, 360 volunteer subjects were stratified by age 
(18-19 & 20-21) with 180 subjects per age grouping. As part of a larger survey 
project, each subject responded to a mailed survey which included Ware's 
General Health Perceptions Scale (GHPS), the Miller Hope Scale (MHS), and the 
Men's Reproductive Health Inventory (MHRI) as well as other instruments. Each 
subject received $25 for participating in the survey.

Findings to be presented include the reliability of the study instruments in 
this population, demographic characteristics of the sample, regression 
analyses of the GHPS and MHS on the MRHI, and the effectiveness of the mailed 
survey with inducement in late adolescent males. Discussion will include 
implications for development of health promotion programs for late adolescent 
males and the use of the Kersell/Milsum model of behavioral change.

