Innovation and Excellence: The Army School of Nursing

Nursing was in a state of upheaval when the first world war began. This 
conflict of international proportions created an immediate demand for trained 
nurses to care for civilians at home as well as soldiers at home and abroad. 
Numerous proposals were advanced for solving the problem of supplying nursing 
personnel including increased enrollments in nurse training schools, decreased 
length of training, Red Cross trained nurse's aids, the training of college 
graduates as nurses (Vassar Plan), and an Army School of Nursing (ASN). The 
purpose of this presentation is to describe those factors that influenced the 
development of the Army School of Nursing in 1918, its contributions to 
nursing education, the reasons for its survival long after the war was over, 
and the factors that brought about its abrupt demise.

Proposed by a group of leaders in nursing education, women of exceptional 
education were to be prepared as nurses in army training camps during war. 
Innovative educational approaches were inaugurated and the school quickly 
earned a reputation as an outstanding educational institution. Although the 
school did not meet its original objectives of providing sufficient numbers of 
nurses for the war effort, it was deemed a success because it demonstrated the 
possibility of developing a well-established school and the likelihood of 
rapidly expanding nursing services in an emergency. Unfortunately, the school 
was closed in January 1933 for financial reasons. Implications for nursing 
education and nursing practice will be presented.

Both primary and secondary sources were utilized for this historical research 
study. Primary sources included letters, government documents, school annual 
and an interview with an ASN graduate.

