Impact of the Threat of War on Military Children

Nancy Ryan-Wenger

US military personnel constantly train in preparation for war. But how 
prepared are their children for war? To what extent does living with the 
threat of war cause fear, anxiety or other emotional responses in military 
children? How do children cope with this pervasive threat to their security 
and family structure? Triangulation of data collection methods (interview, 
self-report questionnaires, projective techniques) are used to address the 
specific aims of this study, which are to compare children of active duty, 
reserve and civilian families with respect to: 1) their perceptions of war; 2) 
origin of fears related to war; 3) levels of manifest anxiety; 4) coping 
strategies; and 5) projection of emotional problems in drawings. The 
theoretical framework underlying this study is an integration of Lazarus' 
stress and coping paradigm and Rachman's theory of fear acquisition. A power 
analysis for ANOVA indicated that 52 children per group are needed, for a 
total of 156 children, ages 8 to 11 yrs. The sample is geographically, 
racially, and socioeconomically diverse; Army, Navy and Air Force families are 
equally represented in the active duty and reserve groups. Group comparisons 
will be made by using ANOVA or chi square. Both qualitative and quantitative 
comparisons of the structured interviews will be done with a computerized 
contextual content analysis program. Study results, to be completed by June, 
1996, may provide direction for anticipatory guidance and nursing 
interventions for children of military families.

