Wounds Become Gifts: The Process of Transilience in Adult Children of 
Alcoholic Parents

Ann E. Cook

The problem in this study was that disproportionately greater attention has 
been paid to the untoward effects of parental alcoholism on adult offspring 
than to the potential positive outcomes. The purpose in this study was to 
explore and discover how adult children of alcoholic parents (ACOAs) have 
achieved satisfactory life adjustments. A grounded theory study was conducted 
to answer these research questions: What is the social-psychological process 
by which adult children of alcoholic parents achieve self-perceived positive 
life outcomes? What are the experiences of adult children of alcoholic parents 
which contribute to their self-identified successful life adjustments? 
Subjects included 27 adults who identified themselves as ACOAs and perceived 
that they have achieved positive life outcomes. The product of this study was 
a substantive theory describing the experiences of ACOAs who perceive they 
have attained positive life outcomes. The basic social-psychological process 
was transilience, defined as the process whereby these ACOAs moved from the 
condition of life in their alcoholic families to a self-identified state in 
which their perceived life outcomes were positive and their overall life 
adjustments satisfactory. Major components of transilience included living in 
the alcoholic family, apprehending the old reality, relinquishing the old 
reality, and constructing the new reality. Encountering critical junctures 
facilitated either a more rapid progression to the next phase or a temporary 
retrogression to earlier phases until appropriate resolution occurred. The 
ongoing outcome of transilience was positive life outcomes and satisfactory 
life adjustments, which are described in the study.

