Clinical Judgement Related to Reducing the Falls Among Geriatric In-Patients

B. Turkoski, J. Salter, R. Brady, J. Guhda, L. Pierce, R. Radziewicz, and S. 
Shreck

In-patient among elderly clients remain a major concern for nurses practicing 
in geriatric settings despite a significant body of empirical investigations 
that have addressed the causes of in-patient falls and evaluated a variety of 
prevention programs. This study differs from these traiditional approaches and 
focuses on how practicing nurses think about and make decisions related to in-
patient falls. The study was grounded in the theory that there are 
discretionary nursing behaviors realted to expertise in nursing, i.e., 
preventing in-patient falls, that are proactive and anticipatory. Subjects 
(n+14) were self-selected RNs employed in a geriatric rehabilitation setting 
who participated in in-dept interviews. Anonymous transcriptions of each 
interview were analyzed, not just for individual linguistic components, but 
for zones of association and contextual relationships. Analyses identified 
four major themes found in all interviews. Within each area there were also 
subthemes that were identified: 1) why in-patients fall: mentation, 
inappropriate physical activity, desire for indepndence, relationship with 
staff; 2) identifying potential fallers: patient behaviors/feelings, patient 
orientation, nurse behaviors; 3) preventing patient falls; communication, 
clinical knowledge, experience, intuition; and 4) nurses' subjective response 
to patient falls: guilt, anger, blame. Discussion of these themes focuses on 
the expressions and phrasing that subjects used to describe their though 
processes or behaviors relating to inpatient falls. Results of this study make 
a valuable contribution to current knowledge about elderly in-patient falls, 
and serves as an impetus for further falls research; especially research that 
focuses on education for clinical decision making.

