Napping and Sleep Quality in Older Adults

Judith A. Floyd

A common sleep-related complaint among older adults is being sleepy in the 
daytime with resultant napping. Hayter (1983) found that napping increased 
with age, did not affect nighttime sleep, and increased the total amount of 
sleep obtained each 24 hours. The primary purpose of this study was 
constructive replication of Hayter's work. Purposive sampling was used to 
select 92 healthy men and women aged 60-89 who were able to report on aspects 
of their nighttime sleep and daytime well-being. Interviews were conducted to 
obtain background information, a sleep history, and perceptions of sleep need. 
Subjects completed the Modified Sleep Chart (MSC) to provide additional data 
on sleep patterns. Test-retest using the MSC was .97. The statistical 
procedures and level of significance, alpha - .05, were the same as those used 
by Hayter. Hayter's claim that napping increases with age was partially 
supported. Most claims about lack of relationships between napping and 
nighttime sleep behaviors were fully supported. Also, Hayter's finding that 
napping increased the total amount of sleep obtained per 24 hours was 
supported. Two important sleep behaviors, sleep latency (t(90)=2.46) ad number 
of nighttime awakenings (t(90)=2.25), were greater for nappers (n=45) than 
non-nappers (n=47). Older adults who wish to nap may be able to do so without 
disturbing many aspects of their nighttime sleep. However, they should be 
informed that research findings about the effects of napping on sleep latency 
and nighttime awakening are inconclusive.

