Validation of Caltrac and Tritrac-R3D Accelerometers to Estimate Energy 
Expenditure in Elderly Subjects with Osteoarthritis (OA) of the Knee

Judith C. Bautch

Estimation of routine physical activity levels is an integral component of 
outcome measurement for special treatment programs as well as in determining 
functional ability of elderly people with OA of the knee. The purpose of the 
study was to measure the validity of the Caltrac and Tritrac-R3D 
(Hemokinetics, Inc., Madison, WI) in this population during treadmill walking.

Two groups of subjects were recruited; those with an abnormal gait and who 
used a cane (n=11) and those with an normal gait without a cane (n=16). All 
subjects met ACR clinical and radiologic criteria for knee OA, had a knee 
extension deficit of > 10 degrees and were > 60 years of age. Oxygen 
consumption, measured simultaneously using indirect calrimetry, was used as 
the reference criterion while subjects walked on a treadmill for three 10 
minute periods at a) self selected speed, 0 grade, b) a 25% increase in speed 
at 0 grade and c) self selected speed at 2% grade. Caltracs were attached over 
both hips and the Tritrac was secured at the waist.

The two groups did not differ in oxygen consumption for any of the walking 
periods. Correlations of estimated energy consumption with either instrument 
were low and not significant. Underestimation of energy cost by the Caltrac 
was 30.39+17.73 and with the Tritrac 23.18+17.59 (mean + SD).

These data suggest that the Caltrac and Tritrac are not appropriate for 
estimation of energy expenditure for individuals functioning within a narrow 
range of activity levels. This may be a function of gait changes with age and 
the heterogeneity of style of muscle use in individuals with an abnormal gait. 
Efforts to develop methods to estimate energy use in this population need to 
continue.

