Functional Status Changes Over One Year in Individuals After Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft Surgery

Janet L. Nieveen, L. Zimmerman, and S. Barnason

The purpose of this study was to investigate changes in postoperative 
fuctional status over a one-year time period in individuals undergoing 
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. Data were collected on 37 men and 
12 women who ranged in age from 43-83 years (mean 65.5 years of age). Subjects 
completed the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form 36-item fuctional status 
questionnaire (SF-36) preoperatively, and postoperatively at 3, 6, and 12 
month follow-ups. This instrument yields a physical health summary score and a 
mental health summary score. Using repeated measures ANOVAs, results revealed 
a significant improvement in physical health scores from preop. to 3 months 
(F=38.98, p<.0001), and from 3 months to 6 months (F=30.45, p<.0001). A 
minimal, nonsignificant improvement occurred from 6 months to 12 months. 
Mental health scores followed the same pattern with significant improvements 
found from preop. to 3 months (F=14.97, p<.001), and from 3 months to 6 months 
(F=29.55, p<.0001). Age exhibited no influence on physical or mental fuctional 
status scores. Males had overall better (although only close to significant) 
physical health scores, while mental health scores were similar between the 
sexes. Length of hospitalization stay after the CABG surgery had a significant 
influence on follow-up physical health fuctional status scores even at the 12 
month follow-up. Individuals staying in the hospital 5 days or less had better 
physical health scores. There was no difference on mental health scores. 
Findings of the study support the need for longer follow-up studies on this 
population, and identify factors contributing to changes in fuctional status 
over time.

