Ventilated Patients Recalled Responses and Self Esteem Post Extubation

Linda Menzel

Although the majority of research on intubated/ventilated (I/V) patients' 
nonphysiological responses is based on data collected after extubation, 
nothing is known about the accuracy of these responses, that is, whether 
patients are able to identify their responses as they were felt and 
experienced when they were I/V. Likewise, although self esteem is 
theoretically related to interpersonal communication, the concept has not been 
examined in I/V patients who are unable to speak and consequently less able to 
communicate effectively with others. The purpose of this prospective 
comparative study was to compare I/V patients' emotional responses to being 
unable to speak, their difficulty with communication, and their self esteem 
during I/V with their recalled responses and self esteem one week after 
extubation. A convenience sample of 65 alert and oriented I/V patients 
recruited from ICUs of a midwestern university hospital provided data while 
intubated, and 31 of these patients participated one week after extubation. 
Instruments used in this study included the Emotion Scale, Ease of 
Communication Scale, Self Esteem Scale, APACHE II and TISS (Therapeutic 
Intervention Scoring System). Paired T tests revealed no significant 
differences in patients' emotional responses to being unable to speak or their 
perceived difficulty with communication reported during I/V and recalled after 
extubation.  Repeated measures ANCOVA showed that patients' self esteem was 
significantly higher after extubation even when severity of illness was 
controlled (F=4.33, p=.048). These findings indicate that I/V patients who 
have been alert and oriented are able to supply accurate data regarding their 
experience in the early post-extubation period. They also suggest that self 
esteem is vulnerable during the I/V experience, possibly related to patients' 
inability to speak.

