Attitudes and Opinions of Mental Illness Among Psychiatric Inpatient Consumers

Jacqueline A. Raybuck, Gina Bufe, and April Lucas

With little available data on attitudes of psychiatric consumers regarding 
mental illness and treatment, past research has reported the impact of three 
key variables: ethnic origin, psychopathology, and socioeconomic status. The 
purpose of this cross-sectional exploratory survey is to evaluate consumers' 
attitudes about mental illness and to explore whether the above-mentioned 
variables influence these attitudes. The Theory of Reasoned Action was 
selected as the theoretical framework. The subjects were 100 adult clients 
admitted to psychiatric divisions of a university affiliated hospital. 
Participants who gave infomred consent met the following inclusion criteria: 
absences of both dementia and psychosis. Several psychometric tools were 
utilized for this research study: The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), 
the Family Assessment Scale, the Folstein Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), the 
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale 
(AIMS), the Global Assessment of Functioning Scale (GAS), and the Azjen and 
Fishbein Social Attitude Scale. Demographic data were collected on the study 
participants as well. Results from multiple regression analyses and T-tests 
support previous research findings. Implications for nursing practice are 
twofold: through the identification of attitudes and opinions about mental 
illness, the Psychiatric-Mental Health nurse can educate the targeted consumer 
about mental health, mental illness, and treatment options. Accordingly, 
adherence to the treatment regimen may be improved and the incidence of 
unwarranted acute exacerbations of mental illness may be minimized.

