Depression in a Disorder of Excessive Sleepiness

Sharon L. Merritt and P. W. Mercer

Guidelines published in 1993 by the AHCPR cite the diagnosis and treatment of 
depression as an area of major concern in primary care. Persons with a chronic 
sleep disorder of excessive sleepiness, such as narcolepsy, may present with 
symptoms of depression that go unrecognized or be assumed to be part of the 
disorder. Initial findings from a large sample survey undertaken by our center 
using the CES-D indicated that 49% of the narcoleptic respondents reported 
experiencing high depressive symptomatology in contrast to findings of about 
20% in the general population. Additionally, anecdotal information provided by 
members of our support group indicate that depression is a common complaint. 
The purpose of this research was to determine the prevalence of depressive 
symptoms among a selected sample of narcoleptics participating in other 
studies being undertaken in our research laboratory, presumably allowing 
tighter control over instrument administration. Results obtained when the Beck 
Depression Inventory was administered to 27 subjects indicate that 13 (48%) 
reported experiencing mild to severe depressive symptoms when the recommended 
score of 10 or > was used as the cutpoint (mean=10.6, SD=8.9). Even when under 
pharmacologic treatment narcoleptics reach an alertness level of about 70% of 
normals indicating that excessive sleepiness is only partially controlled. 
When depressive symptoms are an added burden, narcoleptics may experience 
increased difficulties in managing the disorder along with increased 
functional disability.

