Interpretations of Family Experiences: Implications for Developing Therapeutic 
Interventions for Adult Children of Alcoholics

Sandra H. Tweed

Problem Statement: Recent research indicates, contrary to the popular clinical 
literature, that many adults who grow up in an alcoholic family environment 
(ACOA) show levels of psychological adjustment similar to their peers who did 
not grow up in an alcoholic family. Research nneds to explore what accounts 
for resilience for some ACOA, because such understanding will guide prevention 
and intervention strategies. The purpose of the current study was to employ 
theories of interpretive style to understand what may account for positive 
mental health for ACOA.

Methodology: This study employed an independent groups design that included a 
clinical and nonclinical sample of ACOA (n=214) who completed self-report 
measures of distress, well-being, and interpretive style (ISQ). The ISQ 
included dimensions through which ACOA may interpret their family experiences: 
secretive, predictable, supportive, challenging, worry, blame.

Findings and Implications: Statistical analyses (MANOVA, hierarchical 
regression) indicated that three dimensions of the ISQ accounted for 
resilience for this sample of ACOA. That is, interpretatiions of being less to 
blame for family problems, receiving more emotional/social support, and 
viewing family problems as challenging were influential in explaining more 
positive adjustment, whereas the dimensions of worry, predictability, and 
secretive were not as influential. These findings suggest that developing 
interventions that focus on specific interpretations of family experiences may 
be influential in impacting psychologcial adjustment for ACOA.

