Reciprocity Between Individuals with Severe and Persistent Mental Illness and 
Their Family Members

Edna K. Hamera, Ann Kuckelman Cobb, and Jamey L. Burris-Fish

The concept of reciprocity as it relates to individuals with severe and 
persistent mental illness and their families was applied to responses of 
family members from a larger survey of family members' perceptions of services 
at a community support program. A content analysis was performed on responses 
to the question that addressed what kinds of physical or emotional help the 
relative with a severe and persistent mental illness gave to the family 
member. Of the 131 family members, 48 perceived their relative helping them. 
Their responses yielded 81 statements which were coded into 163 units, then 
categorized. Eight categories of reciprocity were identified from the 
responses: instrumental tasks (40%), caring (16%), personal characteristics 
(10%), family solidarity (8%), self- coping (8%), peace of mind (6%), family 
sensitization (2%), and financial (2%). While most of the current literature 
addresses the assistance that families provide to their members with a severe 
and persistent mental illness and the burden they often place on the family, 
the responses obtained in this study bring a new dimension to consider in 
looking at these relationships. Not only reciprocity by physical/instrumental 
means was identified, but also by emotional/expressive means. These results 
suggest the need for a shift in perspective from one of burden to one of 
reciprocity in further investigations of the relationship between the 
chronically mentally ill and their families.

