Case Managed Care for Technology-Dependent Infants: A Cost Analysis

Virginia Miller

Case management programs can provide comprehensive services to patients with 
complex needs. The Neonatal Pulmonary Program at Tulane University Medical 
Center is a case management program for infants with chronic pulmonary 
problems throughout Louisiana. A nurse case manager coordinates care with a 
multidisciplinary team and the infant's primary care provider and other 
community resources. This study focused on technology-dependent inf&nts with 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and evaluated the Program costs as well as the 
direct and indirect costs to families in caring for their infants. The study 
population included 89 high risk infants enrolled in the Program during the 
time frame of September 1987 through February 1992. Outpatient, inpatient and 
professional staff costs were derived from hospital and clinic billing 
information; all other costs were learned through family interviews. The cost 
analysis included the following: 1) direct health sector Costs of $1,479,042 
(89) for outpatient visits, rehospitalizations, professional staff; 2) direct 
health sector costs of $32,543 (37) for home health care, equipment, 
medications, special diets; 3) direct non-health sector costs of $30,670 (37) 
for transportation, meals, and lodging during clinic visits and 
rehospitalizations, and housing alterations for equipment needs; 4) indirect 
costs of $26,173 (37) for parents' missed work days, demotions and job changes 
due to their infant's illness. This paper will address the economic analysis, 
the challenges of nursing case management for this population and the health 
policy implications of case managed care for this group of technology-
dependent infants.

