Staff Nurses' Work Empowerment, Perceived Control Over Nursing Practice and 
Decisional Involvement: Testing Kanter's Theory of Structural Power

Heather K. Spence Laschinger and Donna Havens

This study tested Kanter's Structural Theory of Organizational Power by 
examining the relationship between staff nurses' perceptions of work 
empowerment and perceived control over their practice and decisional 
authority. According to Kantar (1977), behaviors and attitudes are shaped in 
response to an individual's position and the situations arising in 
organizations as opposed to personal dispositions or socialization 
experiences. Empowerment is obtained from the ability to access and mobilize 
support, information, resources and opportunities in one's position in the 
organization. The empowered are able to accomplish tasks required to achieve 
organizational goals and have the ability to empower those around them, 
thereby increasing work effectiveness. In a descriptive correlational mail 
survey of 127 randomly selected staff nurses employed in 2 North Carolina 
urban hospitals, participants completed the Conditions of Work Effectiveness 
Questionnaire (CWEQ) (Chandler, 1987), the Control over Nursing Practice Scale 
(CNPS) (Gerber, 1993), and the Distribution of Authority Scale (DAS) (Havens, 
1993). The CWEQ measured empowerment concepts described by Kanter. Alpha 
reliability coefficients ranged from .71 to .91. Nurses in this study saw 
themselves as moderately empowered, to have a moderate degree of control over 
their practice, and some input into organizational decisions. Consistent with 
Kanter's theory, work empowerment scores were significantly related to 
perceived control over nursing practice (r=.61, p=.01) and perceived 
decisional authority (r=.31, p=.01).

