Turnover of Hospital Chief Nursing Officers

Thomas Kippenbrock

The purpose of this study was to describe chief nursing officer (CNO) turnover 
using a national sample. This study analyzed reasons for CNO attrition as 
reported by CNOs and the hospital chief executive officer (CEO) using a 
turnover model developed by March and Simon (1958). A descriptive design using 
a survey approach was used with questionnaires mailed to the departed CNO and 
the hospital CEO. Questionnaires were adapted and modified from a tool 
developed by Hart, et al., (1992). Sixty-eight CNO questionnaires were 
returned for a 40% rate. The most frequently reported conditions for leaving 
the CNO position were voluntarily resignation, termination, promotion, 
transfer in the system, and offered a better job. The lack of power to make 
changes (54%) was the most frequently cited reason for leaving followed by 
conflicts with the CEO, inadequate nursing personnel, changing health care 
system environment, and developing an effective management team. CEO's 
responses tended to be different from those of CNOs. Forty-seven CEOs 
responded to the survey for a 28% return rate. CEOs identified insufficient 
management/leadership skills, changing health care environment, difficulty 
developing an effective management team, lack of perceived power to make 
changes, and conflict with CEO. Recommendations include: Education of 
executive nurse managers needs to be examined and revised. The majority of the 
departed CNOs earned only undergraduate nursing degrees and most of those with 
nursing graduate degrees were not in nursing administration. CNOs need to 
attend workshops and conferences on improving management/leadership skills.

