Injury Patterns and Severity Scores of Battered Women in the Emergency 
Department

Ruth A. Pakieser, R. Muelleman, and P. Lenaghan

Nine thousand fifty-seven consecutive women between 19 - 65 years were 
enrolled at ten emergency departments (ED) in two cities. All had their ED 
chart reviewed and were offered a prospective, confidential survey if not 
excluded by illness severity or language barrier. Identification of battered 
women was made by survey response or chart review; injury distribution and 
severity were coded by the abbreviated injury scale. All causes of injury were 
E-coded. Proportions of injuries in each body region and specific injuries 
were compared by comparison of proportions. Approximately 50% completed 
surveys. Of women enrolled, 280 were injured and battered. Most common 
mechanisms of injury of the non-battered women were falls (22.7%), MVA 
(18.5%), movement related (14.79%) and accidental cutting (14.6%). Battered 
women had more injuries and higher 155 scores. Battered women were more likely 
to be injured in the head (p<.001), face (p<.001), neck (p=.009), thorax 
(p<.001) and abdomen (p<.001); but less likely to be injured in the spine 
(p=.006) and lower extremity (p=.005). Injuries more common in the battered 
group were head, face, neck, thorax, abdomen and upper extremity contusions 
(all p<.001) as well as orbit fracture (p=.002); but less common were cervical 
(p=.04) and lumbar (p=.057), strains, ankle sprains (p=.026) and upper 
extremity cutting (p=.04). Ten percent of the women who responded to the 
survey acknowledged being in an abusive relationship. These women presented 
with complaints of vaginitis, pharyngitis, urinary tract infection, and 
attempted suicide more frequently than did injured women who denied a current 
abusive relationship.
