The Demographic Context of Lead Exposure Among Children Attending Public Lead 
Screening Clinics

E. J. Porter

Research concerning lead poisoning in children has been focused upon 
predicting elevated blood lead levels (BPb > 10 micro-g/dl) based on 
demographic data. Although lead exposure is a health state preliminary to 
elevated BPb, little attention has been given to its demographic context. The 
purposes of this study were: (a) to describe the nature and prevalence of lead 
exposure among children who attended six public lead screening clinics in two 
Wisconsin counties and (b) to explore its relationship to variables such as 
family income, rural/urban home location, and history of previous lead 
screening.

The convenience sample consisted of the parents of 274 children. Before the 
child's blood test, parents completed the Lead Exposure Questionnaire (LEQ), 
responding to closed questions about lead sources (e.g., chipping paint in the 
child' s older home), ingestion behaviors, and demographic variables. Data 
were analyzed using Chi-square tests and t-tests. Based on the LEQ, 247 
children (90.2%) had been exposed to at least one lead source. There were 
significant differences (p<.05) in prevalence of exposure to specific lead 
sources between rural/urban residents, renters/homeowners, and families with 
incomes above/below 100% poverty. Of the 218 children who had not been 
screened before, 177 (81.1%) should have been screened; they had at least one 
CDC risk factor for elevated BPb. Nurses must engage in creative primary 
prevention efforts and continue to study lead exposure's demographic context.

