Development of a Measure of Perceived Stigma in People with HIV Infection

Barbara E. Berger, Felissa L. Cohen, and Carol Estwing Ferrans

Stigmatization is a complex process in which inferences are made about an 
individual based on his/her possession of a discrediting attribute. Human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can evoke a strong stigma response because it is 
communicable and often fatal, and is associated with groups that were already 
devalued in other ways. To date, most work with HIV-related stigma has used a 
qualitative approach to explore this phenomenon. This research developed a 
quantitative instrument measuring stigma as perceived by people with HIV. 
Items to measure perceived stigma related to HIV were written based on a model 
derived from the literature on stigma and psychosocial aspects of HIV 
infection. Items surviving two rounds of content review by experts were 
retained. In addition to the stigma items, data collection included measures 
of self-esteem (Rosenberg), depression (CES-D), and social support/social 
conflict (from the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study) that had been previously 
validated with people with HIV. Questionnaire packets were distributed through 
more than 50 HIV health care sites, service organizations, and support groups 
in eight states. Packets could be completed at home and returned anonymously 
by mail. The final sample consisted of 318 questionnaires returned by people 
with HIV (19% women, 22% African-American, 8% Hispanic). Factor analysis of 
the 51 stigma items yielded four factors: personalized stigma, disclosure 
issues, negative self-image, and perceptions of public attitudes toward people 
with HIV. Correlations with self-esteem, depression, social support, and 
social conflict supported the construct validity of the scales based on these 
factors. Extraction of a single higher order factor provided evidence that the 
instrument measured the general construct of perceived stigma related to HIV.

