Survey of Public Health Nurses' (PHNs) Current and Potential Activities with 
Persons with Severe Mental Disabilities (SMD)

Carol W. Kennedy, B. J. Polivka and R. Chaudry

Approximately one third of the clients served by PHNs suffer emotional 
disorders that are unrecognized. Using local systems of care to provide cost 
effective services for this population was the framework for this survey of 
all nursing directors of health departments (HD) and directors of mental 
health agencies (MHA) in Ohio. Using Dillman's Total Design Method, responses 
were obtained from mailed surveys and semi-structured interviews of 135 
(95.5%) directors of nursing (DONs) of HD and 210 (65%) executive directors 
(EDs) of MHA regarding the current and potential roles of PHNs in the care of 
individuals with SMD and the barriers and incentives to enhance the PHNs role 
with this group. Many EDs reported being unaware of PHNs functions, but in all 
categories EDs perceived the current and potential role of PHNs to be greater 
than did DONs. Both groups perceived health education as the largest role and 
perceived counseling and care of psychiatric problems as the smallest current 
and potential roles. DONs noted education, while EDs saw improved care, as the 
greatest incentive to increasing PHNs involvement with the SMD. Both DONs and 
EDs perceived finances as the greatest barrier to role expansion. Results 
reveal the need for improved interdisciplinary awareness and collaboration 
regarding the services offered by public health and mental health agencies. 
With updated education and increased support, PHN can be better utilized to 
provide services to individuals with SMD.

