Early Family Life and Adult Experiences in the Lives of Women

Claire Burke Draucker

Women who have experienced childhood maltreatment, especially sexual abuse, 
may be at risk for continued interpersonal victimization in adulthood. 
However, little is known about the nature of the relationship between 
childhood maltreatment and later experiences of victimization and few studies 
have investigated factors that might mitigate the impact of negative early 
family life experiences. The purpose of this study is to test a casual model 
based on Taylor's (1983) theory of cognitive adaptation and designed to 
identify relationships among early family life experiences, coping mechanisms, 
and victimization in adulthood.

A community-based sample of 622 women obtained by public announcements 
completed a survey questionnaire designed to measure the following variables: 
a. independent variables: the emotional health of family-of-origin (Family of 
Origin Scale, Hovestadt, 1985), childhood sexual, physical (Physical 
Maltreatment Scale, Briere & Runtz, 1988), and emotional abuse (Psychological 
Maltreatment Scale, Briere & Runtz, 1988); b. mediating variables: cognitive 
coping tasks (Cognitive Adaptation Scale, Draucker, 1989; Self-esteem 
Inventory, Coopersmith, 1975), social support (Personal Resource 
Questionnaire, Brandt & Weinert, 1985); and c. depeedent variable: adult 
interpersonal victimization.

Structural equation modeling indicated that the proposed model was incongruent 
with the data. A revised model was designed and will be presented. Results 
suggest that designs utilizing path modeling are essential to understand the 
complex nature of the relationship between childhood and adult victimization 
and to appreciate the role of intervening factors.

