Psychometric Evaluation of a Measure of Family Care Quality

Naomi E. Ervin and Shu-Pi Chen

The purpose of this project was to evaluate the psychometric properties of an 
instrument developed to measure the quality of care provided by a family (or 
friends) to a patient at home. The community health nurse is in a home for a 
brief part of each day or week. Thus a large part of patient care falls to 
family members or friends. This measure, Family Care Quality (FCQ), was 
designed to measure the quality of that care. The FCQ was developed as eleven 
visual analog scales completed by the home care nurse who provided care to the 
patient. Completed instruments on 36 families were analyzed for the initial 
evaluation. Of the 36 patients, 63% were female. Their ages rnaged from 40 to 
93 years with amean of 78.4. Ten (27.8%) of the patients lived alone, 
seventeen (47.2%) lived with one other person; nine (25%) lived with two or 
more people. The alpha coefficient of the FCQ was .96. After an item analysis, 
five items were deleted from the scale with a resulting alpha of .91. An 
examiniation of the construct validity was conducted through performing a 
bivariate correlation of the FCQ with a measure of family coping which ahs 
been shown to be associated with positive caregiving. A moderate correlation 
coefficient (.68) resulted with a two-tailed test of significance (p=.000). A 
factor analysis of the revised instrument resulted in a one factor solution 
with an eigenvalue of 3.78 and 63.1% of the variance explained by the 
solution. Discussion will be presented about these results and implications 
for continued research.

