Documentation of Legal Advance Directives: After the Patient Self-
Determination Act

Kay Weiler and Margaret M. Gurian

This pilot study assessed, "Are decisions made by patients about legal options 
for health care documented on the record?" The study, implemented in five 
hospitals in Iowa, included 318 subjects recruited in primary, secondary and 
tertiary care centers. The project used two data collection instruments: a 
record review form and a telephone interview. The record review was used to 
collect demographic, treatment and other data relevant to the patient's 
ability to comprehend information about legal options. The telephone interview 
instrument included a brief assessment of the patient's understanding of the 
legal advance directive (AD) options available in Iowa. From these 
participants, 265 telephone interviews were matched with record reviews. The 
record review revealed the presence of 23 living wills (LW)s (9%) and 18 
durable powers of attorney for health care (DPAHC) (7%). When the subjects 
were asked during the telephone interview if they had ever signed a legal AD, 
68 (26%) responded that they had signed a LW and 43 (16%) responded that they 
had signed a DPAHC. There was a lack of consistency between the patient's 
stated preferences for having an AD placed in the hospital record and the 
actual presence of an AD in their record. The lack of consistency may have 
been due to: 1) hospital policy for placing the AD in the record assuming the 
patient's implied consent; 2) inadequate patient knowledge regarding 
specifically what an AD represents; 3) lack of nurse's knowledge regarding 
what an AD represents; or 4) patient misconceptions of what constitutes a 
hospital record. The inconsistency between the patient's perceptions of 
whether an AD is in their hospital record and the contents of the record 
indicated the need for further research in this area.

