Acutal and Perceived Riska nd Utilization of Preventive Services in Older 
Women

K. L. Fiandt, C. H. Pullen, and S. N. Walker

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (1989) recommends an essential core 
set of clinical preventive services specific to age, gender and risk status of 
individuals. Research indicates that older women, who experience more illness 
and disability than men, may be among the lower users of recommended 
preventive services. Risk status, both acutal and perceived, amy influence 
health-related behavior. Research indicates, however, that an individual's 
perception of risk is often inaccurate and that preventive health behaviors 
are determined more by this inaccurate perception of risk than by actual risk 
status. The purpose of this research was to study the relationship between 
actual and perceived risk to each other and to the utilization of preventive 
health services in a sample of older women. A sample of 102 women aged 65 and 
older from four rural communities participated in a computer-assisted 
telephone interview administered by the Bureau of Socail Research. Questions 
assessed the women's: a) perceived and actual risk for osteoporosis, 
depression, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, and various cancers 
and b) related health counseling and screening they recalled receiving in the 
past year. Correlational and crosstabular data analyses is still in progress. 
Initial findings indicate a weak relationship between actual and perceived 
risk. Analysis of the relationship  of perceived and actual risk to 
utilization of preventive services relevant to each disorder will be completed 
in October. This study provides a methodology for use with larger samples and 
a foundation for the study of interventions focused on the modification of 
risk perception as a basis for improved preventive health behavior in older 
women.

