Self and nurse Reported Confusion in Hospitalized Older Adults

Leigh Bertholf and J. Billings

Using a prospective, repeated measures design the purpose of this study was: 
to compare patient completed subjective (self reported) measures and 
standardized objective measures of acute confusion, and to examine the 
relationships among subjective measures, standardized mesures and nurse 
charted data of acute confusion. A sample of 84 hopitalized elderly 
medical/surgical patients (age 66-92) were assessed each AM and PM for 
confusion and depression that developed during hospitalization.

Standardized objective tests were used: 1) to measure confusion - Mini-Mental 
State EExamination (MMSE), and Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire 
(SPMSQ); 2) to measure depression - Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). In 
addition, Visual Analog Scales for confusion (VAS-C) and depression (VAS-D) 
provided subjective measurements. Charts were audited for nurse documentation 
of confusion.

In the first 3 days of hospitalization, descriptive statistics indicate the 
following: 1) based on objective tests, 6.5-17.5% scored as confused; 2) 22-
31% self identified some level of confusion; 3) 26-35% self identified some 
level of depression; 4) nurses identify fewer than 9% as confused; and 5) 88% 
of the rsponses from the subjects testing confused using the MMSE/SPSMQ, also 
indicated some level of self-assessed confusion utilizing the VAS-C. No 
significant correlations were found between MMSE or SPMSQ and VAS-C. High 
correlations existed in the following: 1) VAS-C and VAS-D (r=0.7497, p<.001); 
2) VAS-D and GDS scores (r=0.4396, p<.001); and 3) test/retest of VAS-C 
(r=0.919, p<.001). Data suggest clients can self assess some levels of 
confusion/depression. Nurse assessment of patient confusion could be improved 
by using the VAS-C.

